A. Baldwin Wood    Albert Baldwin Wood (December 1, 1879 – May 10, 1956) was an inventor and engineer from New Orleans, Louisiana. He graduated from Tulane University with a Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering in 1899.Wood was hired by the Sewerage & Water Board of New Orleans in 1899 to try to improve the flood-prone city's drainage, Wood invented "flapgates" and other hydraulic devices, most notably efficient low maintenance high volume pumps, including the Wood Screw Pump (1913) and the Wood Trash Pump (1915). Wood spearheaded the reclamation from swamp and the efforts to develop much of the land now occupied by the city of New Orleans. While he spent most of his career in New Orleans, Wood also consulted and designed the drainage, pumping, and sewage systems for other locations including Chicago, Milwaukee, Baltimore, San Francisco, as well as projects in Canada, Egypt, China, and India. His work was especially helpful in the Zuiderzee Works, which reclaimed large areas of land from the Zuider Zee in the Netherlands.Some of Wood's pumps have been in almost continuous use in New Orleans for over 80 years without need of repairs, and new ones continue to be built from his designs.When Wood died, he left a bequest to Tulane University on the condition that it preserve and display his sailing boat, the Nydia, for 99 years. Until 2003, the boat was housed in a specially constructed glass-fronted display area located between the University Center and Fogelman Arena. It was moved to make room for the renovation and expansion of the University Center. Because Tulane did not fully adhere to the terms of the will, Wood's heirs have recovered possession of the boat through legal means. The Nydia is on display at the Biloxi Maritime and Seafood Industry Museum in Biloxi, MS, not far from where the boat was originally constructed at the Johnson Shipyard.  See also  Drainage in New Orleans   References  External links  1974 article on the Wood Screw Pump by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Lighthouse Digest article on Baldwin Wood Lighthouse
A. E. Waite  Arthur Edward Waite (October 2, 1857 – May 19, 1942) was a scholarly mystic who wrote extensively on occult and esoteric matters, and was the co-creator of the Rider-Waite Tarot deck. As his biographer, R.A. Gilbert described him, "Waite's name has survived because he was the first to attempt a systematic study of the history of western occultism—viewed as a spiritual tradition rather than as aspects of proto-science or as the pathology of religion."  Early lifeWaite was born in the United States.   Waite's father, Capt. Charles F. Waite, died when he was very young, and his widowed mother, Emma Lovell, returned to her home country of England, where he was then raised.   As they were not well off, Waite was educated at a small private school in North London.  When he was 13, he was then educated at St. Charles' College.  When he left school to become a clerk he wrote verse in his spare time. The death of his sister, Frederika Waite, in 1874 soon attracted him into psychical research.  At 21, he began to read regularly in the Library of the British Museum, studying many branches of esotericism.When Waite was almost 30, he married Ada Lakeman (also called "Lucasta") and they had one daughter, Sybil.   Some time after Lucasta's death in 1924, Waite married Mary Broadbent Schofield. He spent most of his life in or near London, connected to various publishing houses, and editing a magazine The Unknown World.  Career Golden DawnWaite joined the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn in January 1891 after being introduced by E.W. Berridge.  He became a Freemason in 1901,   and entered the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia in 1902. The Golden Dawn was torn by internal feuding until Waite's departure in 1914; later he formed the Fellowship of the Rosy Cross,  not to be confused with the Societas Rosicruciana.  By that time there existed some half-dozen offshoots from the original Golden Dawn, and as a whole it never recovered. Aleister Crowley, Waite's foe, referred to him as a villainous "Arthwate" in his novel Moonchild and referred to him in his magazine Equinox. Lovecraft has a villainous wizard in his short story "The Thing on the Doorstep" called Ephraim Waite; according to Robert M. Price this character was based on Waite.  Author and scholarWaite was a prolific author with many of his works being well received in academic circles. He wrote occult texts on subjects including divination, esotericism, Rosicrucianism, Freemasonry, and ceremonial magic, Kabbalism and alchemy; he also translated and reissued several important mystical and alchemical works. His works on the Holy Grail, influenced by his friendship with Arthur Machen, were particularly notable.   A number of his volumes remain in print, The Book of Ceremonial Magic (1911), The Holy Kabbalah (1929), A New Encyclopedia of Freemasonry (1921), and his edited translation of Eliphas Levi's Transcendental Magic, its Doctrine and Ritual (1896) among others by Levi, having seen reprints in recent years. Tarot deckWaite is best known as the co-creator of the popular and widely used Rider-Waite Tarot deck and author of its companion volume, the Key to the Tarot, republished in expanded form the following year, 1911, as the Pictorial Key to the Tarot, a guide to Tarot reading.   The Rider-Waite-Smith tarot was notable for being one of the first tarot decks to illustrate all 78 cards fully, in addition to the 22 major arcana cards. Golden Dawn member Pamela Colman Smith illustrated the cards for Waite, and the deck was first published in 1909. It remains in publication today. Other works  Waite, Edward, Inner and Outer Order Initiations of the Holy Order of the Golden Dawn, Canada: Burnaby, 2005. ISBN 0-9735931-7-2. Waite, Arthur Edward, The Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross: Being Records of the House of the Holy Spirit in its Inward and Outward History, London: William Rider & Son Ltd., 1924. Waite, Arthur Edward, Israfel: Letters, Visions and Poems, London: Allen, 1886. Waite, Arthur Edward, A New Encyclopaedia of Freemasonry (Ars Magna Latomorum) and of Cognate Instituted Mysteries: Their Rites, Literature, and History, New York: Wings Books, 1994. ISBN 	0517191482. Waite, Arthur Edward, Theories As to the Authorship of the Rosicrucian Manifestoes, Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing, 2005. ISBN 1-4253-3290-0. Waite, Arthur Edward, The Hidden Church of the Holy Grail: Its Legends and Symbolism Considered in Their Affinity with Certain Mysteries of Initiation and Other Traces of a Secret Tradition in Christian Times, Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Fredonia Books, 2002. ISBN 1-58963-905-7.   References  Sources      External links     Short Biography "The Masonic Career of A.E. Waite", AQC Vol 99 1986 Genealogy and links Works by Arthur Edward Waite at Internet Archive (scanned books original editions color illustrated) Works by Arthur Edward Waite at sacred-texts.com (plain text and HTML)   Bibliography of A.E. Waite
A. P. J. Abdul Kalam          Avul Pakir Jainulabdeen Abdul Kalam ( ; born 15 October 1931) usually referred to as Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, is an Indian scientist and administrator who served as the 11th President of India. Kalam was born and raised in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, studied physics at the St. Joseph's College, Tiruchirappalli, and aerospace engineering at the Madras Institute of Technology (MIT), Chennai. Before his term as President, he worked as an aerospace engineer with Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO).  Kalam is popularly known as the Missile Man of India for his work on the development of ballistic missile and launch vehicle technology.  He played a pivotal organizational, technical and political role in India's Pokhran-II nuclear tests in 1998, the first since the original nuclear test by India in 1974. Some scientific experts have however called Kalam a man with no authority over nuclear physics but who just carried on the works of Homi J. Bhabha and Vikram Sarabhai.  Kalam was elected the President of India in 2002, defeating Lakshmi Sahgal and was supported by both the Indian National Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party, the major political parties of India. He is currently a visiting professor at Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad and Indian Institute of Management Indore, Chancellor of the Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology Thiruvananthapuram, a professor of Aerospace Engineering at Anna University (Chennai), JSS University (Mysore) and an adjunct/visiting faculty at many other academic and research institutions across India. Kalam advocated plans to develop India into a developed nation by 2020 in his book India 2020. Books authored by him have received considerable demands in South Korea for the translated versions.  He has received several prestigious awards, including the Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian honour. Kalam is known for his motivational speeches and interaction with the student community in India.  He launched his mission for the youth of the nation in 2011 called the What Can I Give Movement with a central theme to defeat corruption in India. Kalam was also criticized for inaction as a president on the pending mercy plea petitions, that delayed prosecution of the convicts. Early life and educationKalam was born on 15 October 1931 to Jainulabdeen, a boat owner and Ashiamma, a housewife, at Rameswaram, located in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu.           He came from a poor background and started working at an early age to supplement his family's income.    He was brought up in a multi-religious environment but did follow a religious routine.  After completing school, Kalam distributed newspapers in order to financially contribute to his father's income.   In his school years, he had average grades, but was described as a bright and hardworking student who had a strong desire to learn and spend hours on his studies, especially mathematics.  After completing his school education at the Rameshwaram Elementary School, Kalam went on to attend Saint Joseph's College, Tiruchirappalli where he graduated in physics in 1954.  Towards the end of the course, he was not enthusiastic about the subject and would later regret the four years he studied it. He then moved to Madras in 1955 to study aerospace engineering.  While Kalam was working on a senior class project, the Dean was dissatisfied with the lack of progress and threatened revoking his scholarship unless the project was finished within the next two days. He worked tirelessly on his project and met the deadline, impressing the Dean who later said, "I [Dean] was putting you [Kalam] under stress and asking you to meet a difficult deadline".  Career as scientist  After graduating from Madras Institute of Technology (MIT – Chennai) in 1960, Kalam joined Aeronautical Development Establishment of Defense Research and Development Organization (DRDO) as a chief scientist. Kalam started his career by designing a small helicopter for the Indian Army, but remained unconvinced with the choice of his job at DRDO.     Kalam was also part of the INCOSPAR committee working under Vikram Sarabhai, the renowned space scientist.  In 1969, Kalam was transferred to the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) where he was the project director of India's first indigenous Satellite Launch Vehicle (SLV-III) which successfully deployed the Rohini satellite in near earth orbit in July 1980. Joining ISRO was one of Kalam's biggest achievements in life and he is said to have found himself when he started to work on the SLV project. Kalam first started work on an expandable rocket project independently at DRDO in 1965.    In 1969, Kalam received the government's approval and expanded the program to include more engineers.  In 1963–64, he visited Nasa's Langley Research Center in Hampton Virginia, Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland and Wallops Flight Facility situated at Eastern Shore of Virginia.       During the period between the 1970s and 1990s, Kalam made an effort to develop the Polar SLV and SLV-III projects, both of which proved to be success.Kalam was invited by Raja Ramanna to witness the country's first nuclear test Smiling Buddha as the representative of TBRL, even though he had not participated in the development, test site preparation and weapon designing. In the 1970s, a landmark was achieved by ISRO when the locally built Rohini-1 was launched into space, using the SLV rocket.  In the 1970s, Kalam also directed two projects, namely, Project Devil and Project Valiant , which sought to develop ballistic missiles from the technology of the successful SLV programme.  Despite the disapproval of Union Cabinet, Premier Indira Gandhi allotted secret funds for these aerospace projects through her discretionary powers under Kalam's directorship.  Kalam played an integral role convincing the Union Cabinet to conceal the true nature of these classified aerospace projects.    His research and educational leadership brought him great laurels and prestige in 1980s, which prompted the government to initiate an advanced missile program under his directorship.  Kalam and Dr. V. S. Arunachalam, metallurgist and scientific adviser to the Defense Minister, worked on the suggestion by the then Defense Minister, R. Venkataraman on a proposal for simulataneous development of a quiver of missiles instead of taking planned missiles one by one.    R Venkatraman was instrumental in getting the cabinet approval for allocating 388 crore rupees for the mission, named Integrated Guided Missile Development Program (I.G.M.D.P) and appointed Kalam as the Chief Executive.  Kalam played a major part in developing many missiles under the mission including Agni, an intermediate range ballistic missile and Prithvi, the tactical surface-to-surface missile, although the projects have been criticised for mismanagement and cost and time overruns.     He was the Chief Scientific Adviser to the Prime Minister and the Secretary of Defence Research and Development Organisation from July 1992 to December 1999. The Pokhran-II nuclear tests were conducted during this period where he played an intensive political and technological role. Kalam served as the Chief Project Coordinator, along with R. Chidambaram during the testing phase.     Photos and snapshots of him taken by the media elevated Kalam as the country's top nuclear scientist. In 1998, along with cardiologist Dr.Soma Raju, Kalam developed a low cost Coronary stent. It was named as "Kalam-Raju Stent" honouring them.   In 2012, the duo, designed a rugged tablet PC for health care in rural areas, which was named as "Kalam-Raju Tablet".  PresidencyAbdul Kalam served as the 11th President of India, succeeding K. R. Narayanan. He won the 2002 presidential election with an electoral vote of 922,884, surpassing 107,366 votes won by Lakshmi Sahgal. He served from 25 July 2002 to 25 July 2007. On 10 June 2002, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) which was in power at the time, expressed to the leader of opposition, Indian National Congress president Sonia Gandhi that they would propose Kalam for the post of President.  The Samajwadi Party and the Nationalist Congress Party backed his candidacy.   After the Samajwadi Party announced its support for him, President K. R. Narayanan chose not to seek a second term in office and hence left the field clear for Kalam to become the 11th President of India.  On 18 June, Kalam filed his nomination papers in the Parliament of India, accompanied by Vajpayee and his senior Cabinet colleagues.  The polling for the presidential election began on 15 July 2002 in the Parliament and the state assemblies with media claiming that the election was a one-sided affair and Kalam's victory was a foregone conclusion. The counting was held on 18 July.  Kalam won the presidential election in a highly one-sided contest. He became the 11th president of the Republic of India.  He moved into the Rashtrapati Bhavan after he was sworn in on 25 July.  Kalam was the third President of India to have been honoured with a Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian honour, before becoming the President. Dr. Sarvapali Radhakrishnan (1954) and Dr. Zakir Hussain (1963) were the earlier recipients of Bharat Ratna who later became the President of India.  He was also the first scientist and the first bachelor to occupy Rashtrapati Bhawan. During his term as President, he was affectionately known as the People's President.      In his words, signing the Office of Profit Bill was the toughest decision he had taken during his tenure. Kalam is criticized for inaction as a President in deciding the fate of 20 out of the 21 mercy petitions.  Article 72 of the Constitution of India empowers the President of India to grant pardon, suspend and remit death sentences and commute the death sentence of convicts on death row.   Kalam acted on only one mercy plea in his 5 year tenure as a President, rejecting the plea of rapist Dhananjoy Chatterjee, who was hanged thereafter.    The most important of the 20 pleas is thought to be that of Afzal Guru, a Kashmiri terrorist who was convicted of conspiracy in the December 2001 attack on the Indian Parliament and was sentenced to death by the Supreme Court of India in 2004.    While the sentence was scheduled to be carried out on 20 October 2006, the pending action on the mercy plea resulted in him continuing in the death row. At the end of his term, on 20 June 2007, Kalam expressed his willingness to consider a second term in office provided there was certainty about his victory in the 2007 presidential election.  However, two days later, he decided not to contest the Presidential election again stating that he wanted to avoid involving Rashtrapati Bhavan from any political processes.  He did not have the support of the Left parties, Shiv Sena and UPA constituents to receive a renewed mandate.     Nearing the term expiry of the 12th President Pratibha Patil, whose tenure ends on 24 July 2012, media reports in April claimed that Kalam was likely to be nominated for his second term.    After the reports, social networking sites were abuzz with activities extending their support for his candidature.   BJP potentially backed his nomination, saying that the party will lend their support if Trinamool Congress, Samajwadi Party and Indian National Congress proposes his name for the 2012 presidential election.   Just a month ahead of the election, Mulayam Singh Yadav and Mamata Banerjee also expressed their support to Kalam and revealed that they both would suggest his name.  Days after expressing support, Mulayam Singh Yadav backed out, leaving Mamata Banerjee as a solitary supporter.     On 18 June 2012, Kalam refused to contest 2012 presidential poll after much speculations.      Criticisms and controversiesThe controversy that surrounds Kalam's role as a nuclear scientist, is the lack of reliable and factual reporting of the yield of Pokhran-II tests.    The director of the site test, K. Santhanam, publicly admitted that the thermonuclear bomb was a "fizzle" test, criticising Kalam for issuing the wrong report.  However, Kalam dismissed the claims and R. Chidambaram, a key associate of Pokhran-II, also described these claims as incorrect.   Personal attacksIn spite of his leading role in the development of Indian nuclear programme, Kalam has received criticism from many of his  peers who claimed that he had "no authority" over nuclear science.    Homi Sethna, a chemical engineer criticised Kalam claiming that Kalam had no background in publishing articles in nuclear science, even in nuclear physics. Sethna maintained that Kalam received his masters degree in aerospace engineering, which is a completely different discipline from nuclear engineering, and what various universities awarded him for his achievements had nothing to do with nuclear physics. Sethna, in his last interview, maintained that in the 1950s, Kalam had failed advanced physics courses during his college life and quoted "What does he know (about [nuclear] physics)....?", on the national television. Homi Sethna also accused Kalam of using his presidency to gain a national stature of a nuclear scientist.  Others felt that Kalam had never worked in any of the Indian nuclear power plants and had no role in developing the nuclear weapon which was completed under Raja Ramanna.   Kalam worked as an aerospace engineer in a SLV project in the 1970s and from the 1980s onwards, as a project director before he moved to Defence Research and Development Organisation, Sethna concluded. The prestigious IISc,Bangalore rejected Kalam's application as they felt that he lacked scientific credentials.   In 2008, Indian media questioned his claims about his personal contributions to missile inventions  while working in a classified missile programme.  Kalam had taken credit of inventing the Agni, Prithvi and Aakash missile system.  All of these were developed, researched and designed by other scientists whereas Kalam was involved in getting the funds and other logistic tasks.  As a director of DRDO, a lot of credit had gone to Kalam. R. N. Agarwal, former director, Advanced System Laboratory and former Program Director of Agni missile was considered to be the real architect behind the successful design of Agni Missile.   In his own biography,  Kalam credited the development of Agni missile to Dr Ram Narayan Agarwal, an alumnus of MIT. For the Prithvi missile project, he named Col VJ Sundaram as the brain behind this project and for the Trishul missile, he gave credit to Commander SR Mohan.    In 2006, senior media correspondent Praful Bidwai, in the The Daily Star, wrote that two aerospace projects, Project Valiant and Project Devil, which were authorised by former Premier Indira Gandhi under the directorship of Abdul Kalam, resulted in "total failure". In the 1980s, these projects were ultimately cancelled by the government under the pressure of the Indian Army.   Kalam was also criticised by civil groups over his stand on the Koodankulam Nuclear Power Plant, where he supported setting up of the nuclear power plant and never spoke with the local people.  The protesters were hostile to his visit as they perceived to him to be a pro-nuclear scientist and were unimpressed by the assurance provided by him on the safety features of the plant.   Frisking by American security authorities Abdul Kalam was frisked at the JFK Airport in New York, while boarding a plane on 29 September 2011. He was subjected to "private screening" as he does not come under the category of dignitaries exempt from security screening procedures under American guidelines. He was frisked again after boarding the Air India aircraft with the US security officials asking for his jacket and shoes, claiming that these items were not checked according to the prescribed procedures during the "private screening", despite protests from the airline crew confirming him as India's president.      The incident was not reported until 13 November 2011.  India threatened retaliatory action as there was a "general sense of outrage" around the country.  The Indian Ministry of External Affairs protested over this incident and a statement by the ministry said that the US Government had written a letter to Kalam, expressing its deep regret for the inconvenience. Kalam was previously frisked by the ground staff of the Continental Airlines at the Indira Gandhi International Airport, New Delhi in July 2009 and was treated like an ordinary passenger, despite him being on the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security's list of people exempted from security screening in India.  Future India: 2020 In his book India 2020, Kalam strongly advocates an action plan to develop India into a knowledge superpower and a developed nation by the year 2020. He regards his work on India's nuclear weapons program as a way to assert India's place as a future superpower.It was reported that, there was a considerable demand in South Korea for translated versions of books authored by him.   Kalam continues to take an active interest in other developments in the field of science and technology. He has proposed a research program for developing bio-implants. He is a supporter of Open Source over proprietary solutions and believes that the use of free software on a large scale will bring the benefits of information technology to more people. Kalam set a target of interacting with 100,000 students during the two years after his resignation from the post of scientific adviser in 1999.  In his own words, "I feel comfortable in the company of young people, particularly high school students. Henceforth, I intend to share with them experiences, helping them to ignite their imagination and preparing them to work for a developed India for which the road map is already available."    He continued to interact with students during his term as a President and also during his post-presidency period as a visiting professor at Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad  and Indian Institute of Management Indore,  Chancellor of Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology Thiruvananthapuram,  a professor of Aerospace Engineering at Anna University (Chennai),  JSS University (Mysore),  and an adjunct/visiting faculty at many other academic and research institutions across India. Popular culture In May 2011, Kalam launched his mission for the youth of the nation called the What Can I Give Movement with a central theme to defeat corruption.   He also has interests in writing Tamil poetry and in playing veenai, a South Indian string instrument. He was nominated for the MTV Youth Icon of the Year award in 2003   and in 2006.  In the 2011 Hindi film I Am Kalam, Kalam is portrayed as an extremely positive influence to a poor but bright Rajasthani boy named Chhotu, who renames himself Kalam in honour of his idol.  Awards and honoursA. P. J. Abdul Kalam's 79th birthday was recognised as World Students' Day by United Nations.  He has also received honorary doctorates from 40 universities.   The Government of India has honoured him with the Padma Bhushan in 1981 and the Padma Vibhushan in 1990 for his work with ISRO and DRDO and his role as a scientific advisor to the Government.  In 1997, Kalam received India's highest civilian honour, the Bharat Ratna, for his immense and valuable contribution to the scientific research and modernisation of defence technology in India.   Year of award or honour  Name of award or honour  Awarding organisation  2012 Doctor of Laws (Honoris Causa) Simon Fraser University   2011 IEEE Honorary Membership IEEE   2010 Doctor of Engineering University of Waterloo   2009 Hoover Medal ASME Foundation, USA   2009 International von Kármán Wings Award California Institute of Technology, U.S.A   2008 Doctor of Engineering (Honoris Causa) Nanyang Technological University, Singapore   2007 King Charles II Medal Royal Society, U.K    2007 Honorary Doctorate of Science University of Wolverhampton, U.K   2000 Ramanujan Award Alwars Research Centre, Chennai     1998 Veer Savarkar Award Government of India   1997 Indira Gandhi Award for National Integration Government of India    1997 Bharat Ratna Government of India      1990 Padma Vibhushan Government of India      1981 Padma Bhushan Government of India     Books and documentaries  Kalam's writings  Turning Points: A journey through challenges by A. P. J Abdul Kalam; Harper Collins India, 2012.  Wings of Fire: An Autobiography by A. P. J Abdul Kalam, Arun Tiwari; Universities Press, 1999.  India 2020: A Vision for the New Millennium by A. P. J Abdul Kalam, Y. S. Rajan; New York, 1998.  Ignited Minds: Unleashing the Power Within India by A. P. J. Abdul Kalam; Viking, 2002.  The Luminous Sparks by A. P. J. Abdul Kalam; Punya Publishing Pvt Ltd, 2004.  Mission India by A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, Paintings by Manav Gupta; Penguin Books, 2005  Inspiring Thoughts by A. P. J. Abdul Kalam; Rajpal & Sons, 2007  Developments in Fluid Mechanics and Space Technology by A. P. J. Abdul Kalam and Roddam Narasimha; Indian Academy of Sciences, 1988  Biographies Eternal Quest: Life and Times of Dr. Kalam by S. Chandra; Pentagon Publishers, 2002.    President A. P. J. Abdul Kalam by R. K. Pruthi; Anmol Publications, 2002.    A. P. J. Abdul Kalam: The Visionary of India by K. Bhushan, G. Katyal; A.P.H. Pub. Corp, 2002.    A Little Dream (documentary film) by P. Dhanapal; Minveli Media Works Private Limited, 2008.  The Kalam Effect: My Years with the President by P.M. Nair; Harper Collins, 2008.    My Days With Mahatma Abdul Kalam by Fr.A.K. George; Novel Corporation, 2009.      See also  List of Presidents of India   References  External links   Official website Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam: Former President of India Dr APJ Abdul Kalam Quotes Profile of Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam
A. Peter Dewey   Albert Peter Dewey (October 8, 1916-September 26, 1945   ), shot by accident by Viet Minh troops on September 26, 1945.      Dewey was the first American fatality in French Indochina, killed in the early aftermath of World War II.  (This is often confused with the Vietnam War). Early life and educationThe younger son of Congressman Charles S. Dewey and his wife, Marie Suzette de Marigny Hall Dewey,     and also a distant relative of New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey,  Dewey was born in Chicago.  He was educated in Switzerland at Institut Le Rosey, before receiving further teaching at St. Paul's School (Concord, New Hampshire).  He attended Yale University (where he studied French history and was a member of the Berzelius Secret Society along with friends such as William Warren Scranton, later Governor of Pennsylvania),  and the University of Virginia School of Law. Newspaper workAfter his graduation from Yale in 1939, Dewey worked as a journalist  for the  Chicago Daily News in its Paris bureau.Dewey later worked for family friend Nelson Rockefeller and his Office of Inter-American Affairs, part of the Office of War Information. Rockefeller once sent him to France to meet secretly with General Charles de Gaulle. Battle of FranceWhile reporting on the German invasion of France for the Daily News, Dewey became more directly involved in the war. In May 1940, during the Battle of France, Dewey enlisted as a lieutenant in the Polish Military Ambulance Corps with the Polish Army fighting in France.   Following the defeat of the French army, Dewey escaped through Spain to Portugal, where he was interned for a short time. Marriage and familyOn August 1, 1942, Dewey married Nancy Weller.     The couple had one child, a daughter,  Mrs. Nancy (Charles) Hoppin.    Dewey's nephew David Dewey Alger, a descendant of Michigan political scion Russell A. Alger,  was killed in the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center.  Office of Strategic ServicesOn August 10, 1944, Lt. Col. Dewey parachuted into southern France as the leader of a 10-man team from the United States Office of Strategic Services (OSS).  Operating behind enemy lines for six weeks, he transmitted intelligence reports on German troop movements.  For his service, General William "Wild Bill" Donovan personally awarded him the Legion of Merit and the French gave him the Legion of Honor and a second Croix de Guerre. Morgan, p. 67.  Dewey arrived on September 4, 1945 in Saigon to head a seven-man OSS team "to represent American interests" and collect intelligence.   Working with the Viet Minh, he arranged the repatriation of 4,549 Allied POWs, including 240 Americans, from two Japanese camps near Saigon,  code named Project Embankment. Because the British occupation forces who had arrived to accept the Japanese surrender were short of troops, they armed French POWs on September 22 to protect the city from a potential Viet Minh attack. In taking control of the city, the French soldiers were quick to beat or shoot Vietnamese who resisted the reestablishment of French authority. Dewey complained about the abuse to the British commander General Douglas Gracey, who took exception to Dewey's objections and declared the American persona non grata. Because the airplane scheduled to fly Dewey out did not arrive on time at Tan Son Nhat International Airport, he returned for lunch at the villa that OSS had requisitioned in Saigon. As he neared the villa, he was shot in the head in an ambush by Viet Minh troops. Dewey's jeep overturned, and Dewey's subordinate, Captain Herbert Bluechel, escaped without serious injury, pursued by Viet Minh soldiers. The Viet Minh afterward claimed that their troops mistook him for a Frenchman after he had spoken to them in French. Bluechel later recalled that Dewey had shaken his fist and yelled at three Vietnamese soldiers in French while driving back to headquarters.  According to Vietnamese historian Tran Van Giau, Dewey's body was dumped in a nearby river and was never recovered.   Reportedly, Ho Chi Minh sent a letter of condolence about Dewey’s death to U.S. President Harry S. Truman while also ordering a search for the colonel's body.  MemorialsDewey is not listed on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. because the United States Department of Defense has ruled that the war officially started, from a U.S. perspective, on November 1, 1955, after the U.S. took over following the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu.Dewey's name is listed on the American Battle Monuments Commission's on the Tablets of the Missing at Manila American Cemetery and Memorial as "Major Albert P. Dewey." Dewey is also commemorated in a side chapel in Bayeux Cathedral.After his death, Dewey's non-fiction book, As They Were, about life in Paris before the war, was published with the help of  his widow Nancy and the Rockefeller family.Also, 2005's Fatal Crossroads: A Novel of Vietnam 1945 is based on Dewey's time and death in Vietnam and written by journalist and Dewey family friend Seymour Topping.  Topping dedicated the book to Dewey and his O.S.S. colleagues. He also had returned to visit Vietnam with Dewey's daughter Nancy and her husband.    References    External links  A.P. Dewey. - Arlington.net College photo. - Yale University Library. Peter Dewey in the OSS Society Newsletter. - Summer 2005. - pp. 3–4. - (Adobe Acrobat *.PDF) Bio and links to PDF's of documents surrounding A. Peter Dewey First American MIA in Vietnam. (Archived. 2009-10-24)
AK1200    AK1200 is the stage name of Florida-based musician Dave Minner    working in the jungle and drum and bass genres.   He started DJing in 1989 playing mainly Electro, and in 1990 he opened a record store in Orlando, Florida called The Hottie Shop. His early working relationships were with record labels such as Suburban Base and Moving Shadow. He teamed up with DJ Jeffee to publish the U.S. jungle fanzine Junglized.  His first production effort was a 1993 remix of a Suburban Base Records track by Flex and Fats called Somebody and, as this was released on Suburban Base, he became the first U.S. Jungle producers to release a track in the U.K. (the country of origin of Jungle/Drum and Bass). AK1200 was also the first U.S. DJ to play on U.K. pirate radio, alongside Swift and DJ Zinc on Format FM. Throughout the 1990s he tried his hand at just about every variation on the high speed breakbeat musical idiom and has collaborated with many influential jungle and drum and bass artists including Aphrodite (Artist), DJ Dara, Danny Breaks, Dieselboy, and MC Navigator, as well as with hip hop artists such as A Tribe Called Quest. His debut album, SHOOTTOKILL was co-produced with Rob Playford, of Moving Shadow fame. A prominent American artist in the jungle scene, AK1200 has been credited for helping to increase the popularity of jungle and D&B in the United States, due to his reputation for impressive live performances and prolific remixes, as well as for playing for free to help promote the spread of the style. In 2000 he joined forces with fellow U.S. DJs Dieselboy and DJ Dara to create the annual Planet of the Drums tour.  Discography  1997 Fully Automatic 1996 Sub Base Classics 1999 Lock & Roll - A Drum & Bass DJ Mix 2000 Prepare for Assault 2001 Mixed Live - Moonshine Overamerica, San Francisco 2002 Shoot to Kill 2003 At Close Range 2007 Weapons of Tomorrow 2008 Autopsy (with Gridlok)   References  External links
Aaron Burr      Aaron Burr, Jr. (February 6, 1756 – September 14, 1836) was the third Vice President of the United States under President Thomas Jefferson.After serving as a Continental Army officer in the Revolutionary War, Burr became a successful lawyer and politician. He was elected twice to the New York State Assembly (1784–1785, 1798–1799),    was appointed New York State Attorney General (1789–1791), was chosen as a United States Senator (1791–1797) from the state of New York, and reached the apex of his career as Vice President of the United States (1801–1805).The highlight of Burr's tenure as President of the Senate (one of his few official duties as Vice President) was the Senate's first impeachment trial, of Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase. In 1804, the last full year of his single term as Vice President, Burr killed his political rival Alexander Hamilton in a duel. Burr was never tried for the illegal duel, and all charges against him were eventually dropped. The death of Hamilton, however, ended Burr's political career. President Jefferson dropped him from the ticket for the 1804 presidential election, and he never held office again.After leaving Washington, Burr traveled west seeking new opportunities, both economic and political. His activities eventually led to his arrest on charges of treason in 1807. Although the subsequent trial resulted in acquittal, Burr's western schemes left him with large debts and few influential friends. In a final quest for grand opportunities, he left the United States for Europe. He remained overseas until 1812, when he returned to the United States to practice law in New York City. There he spent the remainder of his long life in relative obscurity. Early life Burr was born in Newark, New Jersey, to the Reverend Aaron Burr, Sr., a Presbyterian minister and second president of the College of New Jersey in Newark (which moved in 1756 to Princeton and later became Princeton University). His mother, Esther Edwards, was the daughter of Jonathan Edwards, the famous Calvinist theologian, making Burr Edwards's grandson. The elder Burrs also had a daughter, Sarah ("Sally"), who married Tapping Reeve, founder of the Litchfield Law School in Litchfield, Connecticut.Aaron Burr's father died in 1757, and his mother the following year, leaving him an orphan at the age of two. Grandfather Edwards and his wife Sarah also died that year; young Aaron and his sister Sally went to live with the William Shippen family in Philadelphia. In 1759, the children's guardianship was assumed by twenty-one-year-old uncle Timothy Edwards. The next year, Edwards married Rhoda Ogden and moved to Elizabeth, New Jersey. Rhoda's younger brothers Aaron and Matthias became the boy's playmates and lifelong friends.At age thirteen, Aaron Burr was admitted to the College of New Jersey in Princeton where he joined the American Whig Society and Cliosophic Society. He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1772, but changed his career path two years later and began the study of law with his brother-in-law Reeve. When, in 1775, news reached Litchfield of the clashes with British troops at Lexington and Concord, Burr's studies were put on hold while he went to join the Continental Army. Military serviceDuring the Revolutionary War, Burr took part in Colonel Benedict Arnold's expedition to Quebec, an arduous trek of over   through the wilderness of what is now Maine. Upon arriving before the city of Quebec, Burr was sent up the Saint Lawrence River to reach General Richard Montgomery, who had taken Montreal, and escorted him to Quebec. Montgomery promoted Burr to captain and made him an aide-de-camp. Burr distinguished himself during the Battle of Quebec, earning him a place on Washington's staff in Manhattan. However, he quit within two weeks, desiring to return to the battlefield.General Israel Putnam took Burr under his wing; by his vigilance in the retreat from lower Manhattan to Harlem, Burr saved an entire brigade (including Alexander Hamilton, who was one of its officers) from capture after the British landing on Manhattan. In a stark departure from common practice, Washington failed to commend Burr's actions in the next day's General Orders (the fastest way to obtain a promotion in rank). Although Burr was already a nationally known hero, he never received a commendation. According to Burr's stepbrother Mathias Ogden, Burr was infuriated by the incident, which may have led to the eventual estrangement between him and Washington.  On becoming a lieutenant colonel in July 1777, Burr assumed virtual leadership of Malcolm's Additional Continental Regiment. There were approximately 300 men under Colonel William Malcolm's nominal command. The regiment successfully fought off many nighttime raids into central New Jersey by British troops sailing over from Manhattan. Later that year, during the harsh winter encampment at Valley Forge, Burr was put in charge of a small contingent guarding "the Gulf", an isolated pass commanding one approach to the camp. Burr imposed discipline there, defeating an attempted mutiny by some of the troops. On June 28, 1778, at the Battle of Monmouth, Burr's regiment was devastated by British artillery, and in the day's terrible heat, Burr suffered heat stroke from which he would never quite recover. In January 1779 Burr, in command of Malcolm's Regiment, was assigned to Westchester County, a region between the British post at Kingsbridge and that of the Americans about   to the north. In this district, part of the larger command of General Alexander McDougall, there was much turbulence and plundering by lawless bands of both patriot and Loyalist sympathizers, and by raiding parties of ill-disciplined soldiers from both armies. Colonel Burr established a thorough patrol system, rigorously enforced martial law, and quickly restored order. He did not stand for any horseplay or reckless behavior. He demanded honesty from his men and when they did not abide by these rules they were punished. One of Burr’s favorites was public shaming in which he tried to embarrass the guilty. When he resigned, he left a description of his “system” in hope that future colonels or generals would continue to enforce these rules. He resigned from the Continental Army in March 1779 due to his continuing bad health and renewed his study of law. Though technically no longer in the service, he remained active in the war: he was assigned by General Washington to perform occasional intelligence missions for Continental generals such as Arthur St. Clair, and on July 5, 1779, he rallied a group of Yale students at New Haven along with Capt. James Hillhouse and the Second Connecticut Governors Foot Guard, in a skirmish with the British at the West River. The British advance was repulsed, forcing them to enter New Haven from Hamden.Despite these activities, Burr was able to finish his studies and was admitted to the bar at Albany in 1782. He began to practice in New York City after the British evacuated the city the following year. The Burrs lived, for the next several years, in a house on Wall Street.  Marriage and familyIn 1782, Aaron Burr married Theodosia Bartow Prevost, the widow of Jacques Marcus Prevost (see The Hermitage), a British Army officer of Swiss origin, who had died in the West Indies during the Revolutionary War. The Burrs moved to New York City, where his reputation as a brilliant trial lawyer grew. Twelve years later, Mrs. Burr died from stomach cancer. They had one child who survived birth, a daughter named Theodosia, after her mother. Burr believed in equality of the sexes; and he prescribed education for his daughter in the Classics, language, horsemanship and music. Born in 1783, Theodosia became widely known for her education and accomplishments. In 1801, she married Joseph Alston of South Carolina and bore a son, who died of fever at ten years of age. During the winter of 1812-1813, she disappeared with the schooner Patriot off The Carolinas, either murdered by pirates or shipwrecked in a storm.Recently, the Aaron Burr Association acknowledged the possibility that Burr had two illegitimate children—Louisa Charlotte (born 1788) and John Pierre Burr (born 1792)—with his servant Mary Emmons, not wanting to delay pending proof of the claims of Emmons' elderly descendant. Burr was still married to Theodosia then, but most of his time was spent in Albany, serving in the State Assembly.  DNA testing, which might verify these claims, is not possible because there is no male descendant in this line. A historian who has written extensively on Burr stated that the claims were "plausible."  Politics Legal and early political careerBurr served in the New York State Assembly from 1784 to 1785, but became seriously involved in politics in 1789, when George Clinton appointed him New York State Attorney General. He was also Commissioner of Revolutionary War Claims in 1791. In 1791, he was elected a U.S. Senator from New York, defeating the incumbent, General Philip Schuyler, and served there until 1797. Although Alexander Hamilton and Burr had long been on good personal terms, often dining with one another (Lomask, vol. 1), Burr's defeat of General Schuyler, Hamilton's father-in-law, probably drove the first major wedge into their friendship.  Nevertheless, their relationship took a decade to reach a status of enmity.   More details of their relationship may be found in the Burr–Hamilton duel article.After being appointed commanding general of U.S. forces by President John Adams in 1798, Washington turned down Burr's application for a brigadier general's commission during the Quasi-War with France.  Washington wrote, "By all that I have known and heard, Colonel Burr is a brave and able officer, but the question is whether he has not equal talents at intrigue." (Lomask vol.1)  John Adams later put this situation in perspective by writing in 1815 that Washington's response was startling given his promotion of Hamilton, "the most restless, impatient, artful, indefatigable, and unprincipled intriguer in the United States, if not in the world, to be second in command under himself, and now [Washington] dreaded an intriguer in a poor brigadier." The Works of John Adams, Second President of the United States By John Adams, Charles Francis Adams, Letter to James Lloyd, 17 Feb 1815, pp. 123–124 Bored with the inactivity of the new U.S. Senate (Lomask vol. 1), Burr ran for and was elected to the New York State Assembly, serving from 1798 through 1799.   It was during this time he cooperated with the Holland Land Company in obtaining a law to permit aliens to hold and convey lands.     During John Adams' term as President, national parties became clearly defined. Burr loosely associated himself with the Democratic-Republicans, though he had moderate Federalist allies, such as Sen. Jonathan Dayton of New Jersey. Burr quickly became a key player in New York politics, more powerful in time than Hamilton, largely because of the Tammany Society, later to become the infamous Tammany Hall, which Burr converted from a social club into a political machine to help Jefferson reach the presidency. In 1799, Burr founded the Bank of the Manhattan Company, which in later years was absorbed into the Chase Manhattan Bank, which in turn became part of JPMorgan Chase.In 1800, New York presidential electors were to be chosen by the state legislature as they had been in 1796 (for John Adams). The State Assembly was controlled by the Federalists going into the April 1800 legislative elections. In the city of New York, assembly members were to be selected on an at-large basis. Burr and Hamilton were the key campaigners for their respective parties. Burr's Republican slate of assemblymen for New York City was elected, gaining control of the legislature and in due course giving New York's electoral votes to Jefferson and helping to win the 1800 presidential election for him. This drove another wedge between Hamilton and Burr. Burr became Vice President during Jefferson's first term (1801–1805). Vice PresidencyBecause of his influence in New York and opposition to the Hamiltonian Federalists, Burr was asked by Jefferson and Madison to help them in the election of 1800. Burr sponsored a bill through the New York Assembly that established the Manhattan Company, a water utility company whose charter also allowed creation of a bank controlled by Jeffersonians. Another crucial move was Burr's success in securing the election of his slate of greater New York City area Electors, defeating the Federalist slate backed by Alexander Hamilton. This event only served to increase the antagonism between the former friends.Burr is known as the father of modern political campaigning.  He enlisted the help of members of Tammany Hall, a social club, to win the voting for selection of Electoral College delegates. He was then placed on the Democratic-Republican presidential ticket in the 1800 election with Jefferson. At the time, most states' legislatures chose the members of the U.S. Electoral College, and New York was crucial to Jefferson. Though Jefferson did win New York, he and Burr tied for the presidency with 73 electoral votes each.It was well understood that the party intended that Jefferson should be president and Burr vice president, but the responsibility for the final choice belonged to the House of Representatives. The attempts of a powerful faction among the Federalists to secure the election of Burr failed, partly due to opposition by Alexander Hamilton and partly due to Burr himself, who did little to obtain votes in his own favor. He wrote to Jefferson underscoring his promise to be vice president,  and during the voting stalemate in the Congress wrote that he would give it up entirely if Jefferson so demanded.  Ultimately, it took 36 ballots before James A. Bayard, a Delaware Federalist, and several of his Federalist colleagues submitted blank votes to decide the election in Jefferson's favor.Upon confirmation of Jefferson’s election, Burr became Vice President of the United States, but despite his letters and his shunning of any political activity during the balloting (he never left Albany) he was never trusted by Jefferson and was effectively shut out of party matters. Some historians conjecture that the reason for this was Burr's casual regard for politics.  Jefferson was tight-lipped in private about Burr, so his reasons are still not entirely clear.  However, Burr's even-handed fairness and his judicial manner as President of the Senate were praised even by some of his enemies, and he fostered some time-honored traditions regarding that office. Historian Forrest MacDonald credited Burr's judicial manner in presiding over the impeachment trial of Justice Samuel Chase with helping to preserve the principle of judicial independence that was established by Marbury v. Madison in 1803.  It was written by one Senator that Burr had conducted the proceedings with the "impartiality of an angel and the rigor of a devil."Burr's farewell in March 1805 moved some of his harshest critics in the Senate to tears. However, except for short quotes and descriptions of the address, which defended America's system of government, it was never recorded in full. Duel with Alexander Hamilton  When it became clear that Jefferson would drop Burr from his ticket in the 1804 election, the Vice President ran for the governorship of New York instead. Burr lost the election, and blamed his loss on a personal smear campaign believed to have been orchestrated by his own party rivals, including New York governor George Clinton. Hamilton also opposed Burr, due to his belief that Burr had entertained a Federalist secession movement in New York.  In April, the Albany Register published a letter from Dr. Charles D. Cooper to Philip Schuyler which relayed Hamilton's judgement that Burr was "a dangerous man, and one who ought not be trusted with the reins of government," and claiming to know of "a still more despicable opinion which General Hamilton has expressed of Mr. Burr." Fleming, p.233  In June, Burr sent this letter to Hamilton, seeking an affirmation or disavowal of Cooper's characterization of Hamilton's remarks. Fleming, p.284 Instead Hamilton responded verbosely, in part that Burr should give specifics of Hamilton's remarks, not Cooper's. He said he couldn't answer regarding Cooper's interpretation. A few more letters followed, in which the exchange escalated to Burr's demanding that Hamilton recant or deny any statement disparaging Burr’s honor over the past 15 years, but Hamilton, having already been disgraced by the Maria Reynolds adultery scandal and ever mindful of his own reputation and honor, did not. Burr responded by challenging Hamilton to personal combat under the code duello, the formalized rules of dueling. Hamilton's eldest son, Philip, had died in a duel in 1801.Although still quite common, dueling had been outlawed in New York, and the punishment for conviction of dueling was death. It was illegal in New Jersey as well, but the consequences were less severe. On July 11, 1804, the enemies met outside of Weehawken, New Jersey, and in the duel Hamilton was mortally wounded. The two sides do, however, agree that there was a three-to-four second interval between the first and the second shot, raising difficult questions in evaluating the two camps' versions.   Historian William Weir speculates that Hamilton might have been undone by his own machinations: secretly setting his pistol's trigger to require only a half pound of pressure as opposed to the usual 10 pounds. Burr, Weir contends, most likely had no idea that the gun's trigger pressure could be reset.  Louisiana State University history professors Andrew Burstein and Nancy Isenberg concur in this view. They note that "Hamilton brought the pistols, which had a larger barrel than regular dueling pistols, and a secret hair-trigger, and were therefore much more deadly,"    and conclude that "Hamilton gave himself an unfair advantage in their duel, and got the worst of it anyway." David O. Stewart, in his biography of Burr, American Emperor, notes that the reports of Hamilton's intentionally missing Burr with his shot only began to appear in newspaper reports published in papers friendly to Hamilton in the days after his death. The two shots, witnesses reported, followed one another in close succession, and none of those witnesses could agree as to who fired first. Prior to the duel proper, Hamilton took a good deal of time getting used to the feel and weight of the pistol (which, incidentally, had been used in a duel in which his own 19-year-old son had been killed on the same Weehawken site), as well as putting on his eyeglasses in order to see his opponent more clearly. His seconds placed him so that Burr would have the rising sun behind him, giving Hamilton a better target, though during the duel itself, one witness reported, Hamilton seemed to be hindered by this placement.In any event, Hamilton's shot missed Burr, but Burr's shot was fatal. The bullet entered Hamilton's abdomen above his right hip, piercing Hamilton's liver and spine. Hamilton was evacuated to Manhattan where he lay in the house of a friend, receiving visitors until he died the following day. Burr was charged with multiple crimes, including murder, in New York and New Jersey, but was never tried in either jurisdiction. He fled to South Carolina, where his daughter lived with her family, but soon returned to Philadelphia and then on to Washington to complete his term as Vice President. He avoided New York and New Jersey for a time, but all the charges against him were eventually dropped. Conspiracy and trial After Burr left the Vice-Presidency at the end of his term in 1805, he journeyed into what was then the West, areas west of the Allegheny Mountains, particularly the Ohio River Valley and the lands acquired in the Louisiana Purchase drumming up support for his plans. Burr had leased 40,000 acres (160 km²) of land (the "Bastrop" lands) along the Ouachita River, in what is now Louisiana, from the Spanish government.His most important contact was General James Wilkinson, Commander-in-Chief of the U.S. Army at New Orleans and Governor of the Louisiana Territory. Others included Harman Blennerhassett, who offered the use of his private island for training and outfitting Burr's expedition. Wilkinson was later proved to be a bad choice. Burr saw war with Spain as a distinct possibility. In case of a war declaration, Andrew Jackson stood ready to help Burr, who would be in position to immediately join in. Burr's expedition of perhaps eighty men carried modest arms for hunting, and no materiel was ever revealed, even when Blennerhassett Island was seized by Ohio militia.  His "conspiracy", he always avowed, was that if he settled there with a large group of (armed) "farmers" and war broke out, he would have an army with which to fight and claim land for himself, thus recouping his fortunes. However, the 1819 Adams-Onís Treaty secured Florida for the United States without a fight, and war in Texas didn't occur until 1836, the year of Burr's death.After a near-incident with Spanish forces at Natchitoches, Wilkinson decided he could best serve his conflicting interests by betraying Burr's plans to President Jefferson and to his Spanish paymasters. Jefferson issued an order for Burr's arrest, declaring him a traitor even before an indictment. Burr read this in a newspaper in the Territory of Orleans on January 10, 1807. Jefferson's warrant put Federal agents on his trail. He turned himself in to the Federal authorities twice. Two judges found his actions legal and released him. Jefferson's warrant, however, followed Burr, who then fled toward Spanish Florida; he was intercepted at Wakefield, in  Mississippi Territory (now in the state of Alabama) on February 19, 1807, and confined to Fort Stoddert after being arrested on charges of treason. Burr was treated well at Fort Stoddert. For example, in the evening of February 20, 1807, Burr appeared at the dinner table, and was introduced to Frances Gaines, the wife of the commandant Edmund P. Gaines and the daughter of Judge Harry Toulmin, the man responsible for the legal arrest of Burr. Mrs. Gaines and Burr played chess that evening and continued this entertainment during his confinement at the fort.Burr's secret correspondence with Anthony Merry and the Marquis of Casa Yrujo, the British and Spanish ministers at Washington, was eventually revealed. It had been to secure money and to conceal his real designs, which were to help Mexico to overthrow Spanish power in the Southwest, and to found a dynasty in what would have become former Mexican territory. This was a misdemeanor, based on the Neutrality Act of 1794 passed to block filibuster expeditions like those questionable enterprises of George Rogers Clark and William Blount. Jefferson, however, sought the highest charges against Burr.In 1807, on a charge of treason, Burr was brought to trial before the United States Circuit Court at Richmond, Virginia. His defense lawyers included Edmund Randolph, John Wickham and Luther Martin. Burr was arraigned four times for treason before a grand jury indicted him. This is surprising, because the only physical evidence presented to the Grand Jury was Wilkinson's so-called letter from Burr, proposing stealing land in the Louisiana Purchase. During the Jury's examination it was discovered that the letter was in Wilkinson's own handwriting – a "copy," he said, because he had "lost" the original. The Grand Jury threw the letter out, and the news made a laughingstock of the General for the rest of the proceedings. The trial, presided over by Chief Justice of the United States John Marshall, began on August 3.Article 3, Section 3 of the United States Constitution requires that treason either be admitted in open court, or proved by an overt act witnessed by two people. Since no two witnesses came forward, Burr was acquitted on September 1, in spite of the full force of the Jefferson administration's political influence thrown against him. In acquitting him, the jury apparently tried to give something like the Scottish verdict of not proven.  Immediately afterward, he was tried on a more appropriate misdemeanor charge, but was again acquitted.The trial was a major test of the Constitution. It was a carefully watched drama (Henry Adams gives a full account in The History of the United States of America (1801-1817)) as Thomas Jefferson wanted a conviction. He challenged the authority of the Supreme Court and its Chief Justice John Marshall – an Adams appointee who clashed with Jefferson over Adams' last-minute judicial appointments. Thomas Jefferson believed that Aaron Burr's treason was obvious, and warranted a conviction. The actual case hinged on whether Aaron Burr was present at certain events at certain times and in certain capacities. Thomas Jefferson used all of his influence to get Marshall to move to conviction, but Marshall was not swayed.Historians Andrew Burstein and Nancy Isenberg write that Burr "was not guilty of treason, nor was he ever convicted, because there was no evidence, not one credible piece of testimony, and the star witness for the prosecution had to admit that he had doctored a letter implicating Burr."  Later life and death By this point all of Burr's hopes for a political comeback had been dashed, and he fled America and his creditors  for Europe, where he tried to regain his fortunes. He lived abroad from 1808 to 1812, passing most of his time in England where he occupied a house on Craven Street in London. He became a good friend, even confidant, of the English Utilitarian philosopher, Jeremy Bentham, even living at Bentham's home on occasion. He also spent time in Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Germany, and France. Ever hopeful, he solicited funding for renewing his plans for a conquest of Mexico, but was rebuffed. He was ordered out of England and Napoleon Bonaparte refused to receive him—although one of his ministers held an interview concerning Burr's aims for Spanish Florida or British possessions in the Caribbean. After returning from Europe, Burr used the surname "Edwards," his mother's maiden name, for a while to avoid creditors. With help from old friends Samuel Swartwout and Matthew L. Davis, Burr was able to return to New York and his law practice. There he lived the remainder of his life in relative peace.In 1833, at age 77, Burr married again, this time to Eliza Jumel, a wealthy widow. Soon, however, she realized her fortune was dwindling due to her husband's land speculation losses.  She separated  from Burr after only four months; the divorce was completed on September 14, 1836, the day of Burr's death. The home of Eliza Jumel and Aaron Burr, the Morris-Jumel Mansion in Manhattan, is now open to the public. Burr suffered a debilitating stroke in 1834, which rendered him immobile. In 1836, Burr died on Staten Island in the village of Port Richmond. He was buried near his father in Princeton, New Jersey. CharacterAaron Burr made many friends but also some powerful enemies, and is still perhaps the most controversial of the Founding Fathers of the United States. He was indicted for murder (but not convicted) after the death of Hamilton; arrested and prosecuted for treason by Jefferson (but not convicted). To his friends and family, and often to complete strangers, he was kind and generous. In her Autobiography of Jane Fairfield, the wife of the struggling poet Sumner Lincoln Fairfield relates how their friend Burr saved the lives of her two children, who were left with their grandmother in New York while the parents were in Boston. The grandmother was unable to provide adequate food or heat for the children and was in fear for their very lives. She sought out Burr, as the only one that might be able and willing to help her. Burr "wept and replied, 'Though I am poor and have not a dollar, the children of such a mother shall not suffer while I have a watch.' He hastened on this errand, and quickly returned, having pawned the article for twenty dollars, which he gave to make comfortable my precious babies."  In his later years in New York, he provided money and education for several children, earning their lifelong affection.Burr believed women to be intellectually equal to men, and hung a portrait of Mary Wollstonecraft over his mantel. The Burrs' daughter, Theodosia, was taught dance, music, several languages and learned to shoot from horseback. Until her death at sea in 1813, she remained devoted to her father. Not only did Burr advocate education for women, upon his election to the New York State Legislature, he submitted a bill to allow women to vote.In 1784 as a New York state assemblyman, he unsuccessfully sought to immediately end slavery in that state.  John Quincy Adams (who was a great admirer of Jefferson) said after the former vice president's death, "Burr's life, take it all together, was such as in any country of sound morals his friends would be desirous of burying in quiet oblivion."  This was his own opinion: his father, President John Adams, was an admirer and frequent defender of Burr.  John Adams wrote that Burr "had served in the army, and came out of it with the character of a knight without fear and an able officer." Gordon S. Wood, a leading scholar of the Revolutionary period, holds that it was Burr’s character that put him at odds with the rest of the “founding fathers,” especially Madison, Jefferson, and Hamilton, leading to his personal and political defeats and, ultimately, to his place outside the golden circle of revered revolutionary figures.  Because of his habit of placing self-interest above the good of the whole, those men felt Burr represented a serious threat to the very ideals for which they had fought the Revolution.  Their ideal, as particularly embodied in Washington and Jefferson, was that of “disinterested politics,” a government led by educated gentlemen who would fulfill their duties in a spirit of public virtue and without regard to personal interests or pursuits.  This was the core of an Enlightenment gentleman, and Burr, his political enemies felt, lacked that essential core.  Indeed, it was Hamilton’s belief that Burr’s self-serving nature made him unfit to hold office—especially the presidency.  Jefferson, though one of Hamilton’s bitterest enemies, was at least a man of public virtue.  This belief led Hamilton to launch his unrelenting campaign in the House of Representatives to prevent Burr’s election to the presidency, favoring his erstwhile enemy Jefferson instead.  Later in Burr’s life, Jefferson, in turn, would go so far as to push the boundaries of the Constitution in his attempt—in the charging and trying of Burr for treason—to eliminate Burr.  LegacyA lasting consequence of Burr's role in the election of 1800 was the Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which changed the way in which vice presidents were chosen. As was obvious from the 1800 election, the situation could easily arise where the vice-president, as the defeated presidential candidate, could not work well with the president. The Twelfth Amendment required that votes be cast separately for president and vice president.    In public and in private, Burr's behavior, even by his political foes, was labelled as considerate and gracious and he was often commended as a great listener. Although much took place in Burr's life, he is remembered by many only for the deadly duel with Hamilton. However, his establishment of guides and rules for the first Senate impeachment trial set a high moral bar for behavior and procedures in that chamber, many of which are followed today. His silence and refusal to engage in defending himself from his political critics either in legislatures or in the press, plus the fact that most of his personal papers disappeared with his daughter's death at sea and with his biographer, Matthew Davis, has left an air of mystery over his reputation. Burr in literature and popular culture Burr appears as a character epitomizing worldly sophistication in Harriet Beecher Stowe's 1859 historical romance The Minister's Wooing.Edward Everett Hale's 1863 story The Man Without a Country is about a fictional co-conspirator of Burr's, who is exiled for his crimes."The Aaron Burr Story", a second season (1965) episode of the television series Daniel Boone, starred Leif Erickson as ex-Vice President Aaron Burr attempting to set up an army to take over the western states.  In the show, Burr's attempt to hire one of Daniel Boone's young impressionable friends as a wilderness guide is ultimately thwarted by Boone when a proclamation is published for Burr's arrest for treason against the United States.The historical novel Burr, written in 1973, is the first (in historical chronology) volume in Gore Vidal's Narratives of Empire series."A Friend to Alexander", in James Thurber's My World and Welcome To It, transported the Burr–Hamilton rivalry into the twentieth century.Eudora Welty wrote a story about the romance of Burr's Western expedition, "First Love", which appears in Selected Stories of Eudora Welty (Modern Library 1992).In the comic book The Flash, a 1975 backup story featuring Green Lantern stars Burr.  "The Man of Destiny", written by Dennis O'Neil and drawn by Dick Dillin, reveals that Burr was recruited by aliens to act as a leader for an interplanetary society in chaos. (The alliance cloned Burr, sending the clone back to earth to duel with Hamilton and live out of the rest of "Burr s life on earth).In Michael Kurland's The Whenabouts of Burr (DAW, 1975)  the protagonists chase across various alternate universes, trying to recover the Constitution of the United States, which has been stolen and replaced by an alternate signed by Aaron Burr instead of Alexander Hamilton.In Orson Scott Card's alternate history / fantasy novel Seventh Son (1987), a character states that "... Aaron Burr got to be governor of Suskwahenny, before Daniel Boone shot him dead in ninety-nine."A famous 1993 "Got Milk?" commercial directed by Michael Bay features a historian obsessed with the study of Aaron Burr—he owns the guns and the bullet from the duel. He is called by a radio station and offered a prize if he can name the person who killed Alexander Hamilton in the duel, but he has peanut butter in his mouth and is out of milk, and cannot manage to say "Aaron Burr" clearly enough to be heard before his time runs out. In Alexander C. Irvine's 2002 novel A Scattering of Jades, Burr takes part in a plot to bring an ancient Aztec deity into power, explaining his interest in Mexico.The Lonely Island's "Lazy Sunday" quotes the line "you can call us Aaron Burr from the way we're dropping Hamiltons", referring to the large number of ten dollar bills being spent and the duel between Burr and Alexander Hamilton referring to how Aaron Burr killed or "dropped" him.In the alternate history short story "The War of '07" by Jayge Carr, contained in the collection Alternate Presidents, Burr is elected President in 1800, establishing an alliance with Napoleon Bonaparte and creates a family dictatorship. Upon his death in 1836, he is succeeded by his grandson Aaron Burr Alston, who previously served as his Vice President. Notes  References     Adams, John, and Charles Francis Adams. The Works of John Adams, Second President of the United States: With a Life of the Author, Notes and Illustrations. Boston: Little, Brown, 1850. online edition Retrieved October 4, 2008 Burr, Aaron.  Political Correspondence and Public Papers of Aaron Burr. Mary-Jo Kline and Joanne W. Ryan, eds. 2 vol. Princeton University Press, 1983. 1311 pp. Cheetham, James.  Nine Letters on the Subject of Aaron Burrs Political Defection. Reprint by Kessinger Publishing, 2007. Cheetham, James. A view of the political conduct of Aaron Burr, esq., vice-president of the United States. (1802) Clark, Daniel.  Proofs of the Corruption of Gen. James Wilkinson, and of His Connexion With Aaron Burr: A Full Refutation of His Slanderous Allegations in Relation to ... of the Principal Witness Against Him (1809). Reprinted by University Press of the Pacific, 2005. Davis, Matthew L. Memoirs of Aaron Burr. With Miscellaneous Selections from His Correspondence. 2 Vols. New York: Harper & Bros, 1837. Project Gutenberg: Vol. 1, Vol. 2 Retrieved 12 December 2010 Ellis, Joseph. The Founding Brothers (2000) Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-375-40544-5 Fairfield, Jane Frazee, and Sumner Lincoln Fairfield. The Autobiography of Jane Fairfield; Embracing a Few Select Poems by Sumner Lincoln Fairfield. Boston: Bazin and Ellsworth, 1860. online edition Retrieved September 5, 2007 Fleming, Thomas. Duel: Alexander Hamilton, Aaron Burr, and the Future of America New York: Basic Books, 1999. Isenberg, Nancy. Fallen Founder: The Life of Aaron Burr New York, 2007. Lomask, Milton. Aaron Burr. 2 Vols. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1979. Missouri History Museum Archives. Aaron Burr Papers Pickett, Albert James. "The Arrest of Aaron Burr in Alabama." History of Alabama, and Incidentally of Georgia and Mississippi, from the Earliest Period. Charleston: Walker and James, 1851. online edition Retrieved September 27, 2007 Robertson, David. Reports of the Trials of Colonel Aaron Burr (Late Vice President of the United States) for Treason and for Misdemeanor...Two Volumes (report taken in shorthand) (1808) Schachner, Nathan, Aaron Burr, A Biography, New York, 1937. online edition Stewart, David O., "American Emperor:  Aaron Burr's Challenge to Jefferson's America (Simon & Schuster, 2011). Van Ness, William Peter. An Examination of the Various Charges Exhibited Against Aaron Burr, Vice-President of the United States: and a Development of the Characters and Views of His Political Opponents. (1803) Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing, 2007.     Further reading   Abernethy, Thomas Perkins. "Aaron Burr in Mississippi." Journal of Southern History 1949 15 (1): 9–21. ISSN 0022-4642 Adams, Henry, History of the United States, vol. iii. New York, 1890. (For the traditional view of Burr's conspiracy.) Alexander, Holmes Moss.  Aaron Burr: The Proud Pretender.  1937; Reprinted by Greenwood-Heinemann Publishing, 1973.   Burdett, Charles. Margaret Moncrieffe: The First Love Of Aaron Burr. Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing, 2007. Clark, Alan J., Cipher Code of Dishonor: Aaron Burr, an American Enigma. Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse, 2005. Clemens, Jere. (Hon.), The Rivals: A Tale of the Times of Aaron Burr and Alexander Hamilton. (1860) online edition Cohalan, John P., The Saga of Aaron Burr (1986) Cote, Richard N., Theodosia - Theodosia Burr Alston: Portrait of a Prodigy. (2002) Faulkner, Robert K. "John Marshall and the Burr Trial." Journal of American History 1966 53(2): 247–258. ISSN 0021-8723 Fleming, Thomas. Duel: Alexander Hamilton, Aaron Burr, and the Future of America. New York: Basic Books, 1999. Ford, Worthington Chauncey. "Some Papers of Aaron Burr", in Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society, April 1919. Freeman, Joanne B. "Dueling as Politics: Reinterpreting the Burr-Hamilton Duel." William and Mary Quarterly 53(2) (1996): 289–318. ISSN 0043-5597 Harrison, Lowell.  1978.  "The Aaron Burr Conspiracy."  American History I	Illustrated 13:25. Isenberg, Nancy. Fallen Founder: The Life of Aaron Burr.  New York: Viking, 2007. Jenkinson, Isaac. Aaron Burr: His Personal and Political Relations with Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton. (1902)   Kennedy, Roger G. Burr, Hamilton, and Jefferson: A Study in Character.  New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. Künstler, Laurence S. The Unpredictable Mr. Aaron Burr (1974). Larson, Edward J. A Magnificent Catastrophe: The Tumultuous Election of 1800, America's First Presidential Campaign.  New York: Free Press, 2007. Lomask, Milton. Aaron Burr. 2 Vols. New York, 1979, 1983. McCaleb, Walter Flavius, The Aaron Burr Conspiracy: A History Largely from Original and Hitherto Unused Sources, New York, 1903. McCaleb, Walter Flavius, A New Light on Aaron Burr (date unknown) Melton, Buckner F., Jr.  Aaron Burr: Conspiracy to Treason. New York: John Wiley, 2002. online edition Parmet, Herbert S. and Marie B. Hecht; Aaron Burr; Portrait of an Ambitious Man (1967). online edition Parton, James, The Life and Times of Aaron Burr, Boston and New York, 1898. (2 vols.) Rogow, Arnold A. A Fatal Friendship: Alexander Hamilton and Aaron Burr (1998). Rorabaugh, William J. "The Political Duel in the Early Republic: Burr v. Hamilton." Journal of the Early Republic 1995 15(1): 1–23. ISSN 0275-1275 Seton, Anya. My Theodosia (1948). Slaughter, Thomas P. "Review Essay: Conspiratorial Politics: The Public Life of Aaron Burr."  Conspiratorial Politics. Stewart, David O. American Emperor:  Aaron Burr's Challenge to Jefferson's America. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011. Todd, Charles Burr. The True Aaron Burr: A Biographical Sketch (1902). Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing, 2007. Vail, Philip. The Great American Rascal: The Turbulent Life of Aaron Burr (1973). Vidal, Gore, Burr (1973). A fictionalized view of Burr's life. Wandell, Samuel H. and Meade Minngerode.  Aaron Burr (1925). Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing. Wells, Colin.  "Aristocracy, Aaron Burr, and the Poetry of Conspiracy." Early American Literature (2004). Wheelan, Joseph.  Jefferson's Vendetta: The Pursuit of Aaron Burr and the Judiciary. New York: Carroll & Graff, 2005.   Wood, Gordon S.  2006 Revolutionary Characters.  New York: Penguin.   External links     Did Aaron Burr Really Try to Take Over Half of America? The Political Graveyard: Edwards family Photographic tour of Aaron Burr's grave at Princeton Cemetery. Find-A-Grave profile for Aaron Burr Harry Toulmin Biography The Arrest of Aaron Burr in Alabama The Aaron Burr Association Letters of Aaron Burr   Retrieved on 2009-02-26
Aaron Carter    Aaron Charles Carter    (born December 7, 1987)  is an American singer. He came to fame as a pop and hip hop singer in the late 1990s, establishing himself as a star among pre-teen and teenage audiences during the early-first decade of the 21st century.    Life and careerCarter was born at the Tampa General Hospital in Tampa, Florida,  where his parents, Jane Elizabeth (née Spaulding) and Robert Gene Carter, ran the Garden Villa Retirement Home. The family was originally from upstate New York,  where his brother Nick, of the boy band Backstreet Boys, was born. Aside from his older brother Nick, he also has three sisters: twin sister Angel (a model), B.J. and Leslie (1986–2012). Carter is named after his maternal grandfather, Douglas "Charles" Spaulding, and paternal grandfather, Aaron Charles Carter.  Carter attended the Frank D. Miles Elementary School and the Ruskin School in Florida.  Carter has said that the mood in his home was often tense because of his parents' divorce. His parents would often argue about his money and Carter would often be in the middle of the fight, trying to stop it. Carter later felt that he was pushed into show business when he was too young. Music beginnings and self-titled debut albumCarter began his performing career at the age of seven, as the lead singer of a local band, Dead End. He left the band after two years because they were leaning towards alternative music and he wanted to do pop. He made his first solo appearance, singing a cover of The Jets' "Crush on You", when opening for the Backstreet Boys in Berlin in March 1997. The performance was followed by a record contract, and in the fall of 1997, he released his first single, "Crush on You". His first full-length album was released on December 1, 1997. The eponymous debut album achieved gold status in Norway, Spain, Denmark, Canada, and Germany, and was released in the United States on June 16, 1998. 2000–2001: Aaron's Party (Come Get It), acting debut, and Oh AaronHis next album, Aaron's Party (Come Get It) was released in the United States on September 26, 2000 under the Jive label. The album sold more than 1.5 million copies in the United States.  The album included the hit singles, "I Want Candy", "Aaron's Party (Come Get It)", "That's How I Beat Shaq" and "Bounce", which the songs received airplay on Disney and Nickelodeon. He also made several guest appearances on Nickelodeon and opened up several concerts for Britney Spears and the Backstreet Boys. In December of that year, the album went platinum and he began dating teen actress Hilary Duff.  In March 2001, he made his acting debut by guest starring on an episode of the Disney Channel series Lizzie McGuire. That same month, he and fellow teen star Samantha Mumba performed a concert in MGM studios live on Disney Channel titled Aaron Carter and Samantha Mumba in Concert. Aaron's part of the concert was released to DVD that same month as Aaron's Party: Live in Concert. In April 2001, he made his Broadway debut, playing JoJo the Who in Seussical the Musical by Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty.At the age of 13, Carter recorded the album Oh Aaron, which was released on August 7, 2001 and featured his first duet recording with his brother, Nick, and a duet with the new group at the time, No Secrets. Play Along Toys also created an Aaron Carter action figure in conjunction with the album's release.    Oh Aaron also went platinum that same year and a live concert at Baton Rouge, Louisiana, was released to DVD as Oh Aaron: Live In Concert. 2002–2006: Another Earthquake and Saturday NightCarter's next album, Another Earthquake, was released on September 3, 2002, during the "Rock, Rap, and Retro" tour. The album featured the patriotic-themed "America A.O." and the ballad "Do You Remember". That album also went platinum that same year. He had guest starred on three episodes of All That and contributed to the PBS Show Liberty's Kids by singing the theme song, "Through My Own Eyes." During that time, Carter's parents filed a lawsuit against his former manager, Lou Pearlman (now in federal prison for major fraud), in 2002 alleging failure to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars in royalties on Carter's 1998 album, which was released through Pearlman's label and production company, Trans Continental. On March 13, 2003, Pearlman was declared in contempt of court for ignoring a court order to produce documents relating to royalty payments.  He had also dated Lindsay Lohan along with his girlfriend Hilary Duff at the same time (leading to a feud between the two), but he broke up with Lohan in April 2003, and resumed dating Duff. Later, that same year, he reportedly cheated on her and Duff ended their on-and-off relationship after two years.  Carter's Most Requested Hits, a collection including tracks from his last three albums as well as a new single, "One Better", was released on November 3, 2003. "Saturday Night", which was released on March 22, 2005 and was promoted by Carter during his summer 2005 Remix Tour. The song was released by Trans Continental label, with Lou Pearlman as executive producer. The single was also featured in the soundtrack of the film Popstar, in which Carter starred. The direct-to-video film was based heavily on his own life as a performer. A real-life motocross racer, Carter also appeared in 2005's Supercross. On March 21, 2006, Trans Continental filed a lawsuit against Carter within the Los Angeles Superior Court, citing that Carter allegedly reneged on a recording deal. Carter had signed the contract on December 7, 2004, when he was 17 and underage. His attorney however stated that Carter had the right to "cancel or void various agreements" that were signed when he was a minor.   Carter and his siblings starred in a reality show, House of Carters, which ran in October–November 2006 on E!. The series features all five Carter siblings reuniting to live in the same house.  On September 18, 2006, it was reported that Carter was engaged to former beauty queen and Playboy model Kari Ann Peniche.   US Weekly later reported that Carter had broken off his engagement to Peniche, saying he was impulsive in proposing to her.  2008–present: Legal troubles and fifth studio albumOn February 21, 2008, Carter was arrested in Kimble County, Texas, when he was pulled over for speeding, and authorities found less than two ounces of marijuana in his car.    Carter joined season 9 primetime reality series, Dancing with the Stars. ABC.com   On November 10, 2009 he was eliminated from the show along with his partner Karina Smirnoff. They finished in fifth place.  Week # Dance/Song Judges' score Result  Inaba Goodman Tonioli  1 Cha cha cha 7 8 7 Safe  2 Quickstep 9 9 9 Safe  3 Rumba 8 6 7 Safe  4 Lambada 6 6 6 Bottom Two  5 Argentine tango 8 8 8 Bottom Two  6 Waltz/Mambo Marathon 8 9 8 Safe  7 Jive/Team Paso Doble 9 10 10 Safe  8 Foxtrot/'90s Samba 7/9 8/9 8/9 Eliminated  During this time he also released some music online, including the single "Dance with Me" featuring Flo Rida in an attempt to kickstart his music career again. Carter is in the process of working on a new studio album, last heard Producer/Mix Engineer Brody Murakami was asked by Carters Manager to assist. On August 22, 2010, Carter performed in Lake Ronkonkoma, NY at a benefit concert for Audrianna Bartol, a 3-year-old stricken with Stage 4 neuroblastoma cancer.   On January 23, 2011, Aaron Carter's manager Johnny Wright announced that Carter had entered a treatment facility "to heal some emotional and spiritual issues he was dealing with."  After entering the facility, Carter's first message to his fans was, "The main thing in life is not to be afraid of being human."  On February 10, 2011, it was announced that Carter had successfully completed a month of rehab at the Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage, California.  Carter was scheduled to perform a second benefit concert for Audrianna Bartol on February 5, 2011 in Lake Ronkonkoma, NY  and a benefit for the activist organization, "Four Years. Go", was originally scheduled for February 24, 2011 in Manville, New Jersey.  The Manville show was rescheduled to take place on March 24, 2011.  On September 2, 2011, Carter performed a show at the Eagle Ridge Mall in Lake Wales, Florida. On November 7, 2011, Carter began starring in the Off-Broadway production of the world's longest running musical, The Fantasticks, at the Snapple Theater Center in New York City. Carter has been cast in the role of Matt, the play's central character. In January 2012, Carter was one of eight celebrities participating in the Food Network reality series Rachael vs. Guy: Celebrity Cook-Off.  He was eliminated in the first episode.Throughout 2012, Carter has made several one-off performances. On January 12, 2012, Carter performed a concert at Showcase Live in Foxborough, Massachusetts,  and on January 19, 2012, he performed another concert at the Gramercy Theater in New York City.  On May 11, 2012, he performed an acoustic show at the Mohegan Sun casino in Uncasville, Connecticut.  Carter hosted a Ryan Cabrera show on May 30, 2012 in Flemington, New Jersey,  and performed at Mixtape Festival on August 17, 2012. Discography      Studio albums  1997: Aaron Carter 2000: Aaron's Party (Come Get It) 2001: Oh Aaron 2002: Another Earthquake   Compilation albums  2003: Most Requested Hits 2006: Come Get It: The Very Best of Aaron Carter 2006: 2 Good 2 B True   DVDs  2000: Aaron's Party: The Videos 2001: Aaron's Party: Live in Concert 2002: Oh Aaron: Live in Concert   Filmography Television  title  role  notes  year  Figure it Out Himself 1 episode 1998  Lizzie McGuire  Himself  1 episode 2001  'Sabrina, the Teenage Witch  Himself   1 episode 2001  '48 Hours Mystery Himself 1 episode 2002  Liberty's Kids Joseph Plumb Martin  voice 2002  Family Affair Liam Curtis 1 episode 2003  7th Heaven Harry  2 episodes 2004  Penn & Teller: Off the Deep End Himself  2005  House of Carters Himself  2006  Grand Stand Mitch TV Pilot - never aired (2007   Film  title role  year  notes  Fat Albert  Darren/The Kid  2004    Ella Enchanted  2004 Singing main male vocals in "Somebody to Love"  Popstar JD McQueen 2005  straight to DVD  'Supercross Owen Cole  2005     I Want Someone to Eat Cheese With  Marty  2006  Theatrical Release: 21 September 2007   References  External links
Aaron Smith (musician)   Aaron "The A-Train" Smith (born c. 1952) is a Nashville-based drummer and percussionist.At the age of 21, Aaron Smith played drums on The Temptations' megahit "Papa Was a Rollin' Stone" (which was a #1 hit on the Billboard Hot 100 and won three Grammy Awards in 1973), and recorded with Ray Charles as well. In the fall of 1974, Smith toured with Czechoslovakian bassist Miroslav Vitouš in support of Miroslav's Warner Bros. release Magical Shepherd.  After this tour, he moved to Boston, where he studied for two years under jazz drummer Alan Dawson. From Boston, he moved to San Francisco where he was a co-founder of the power funk trio Peter Bilt. Later on he joined Romeo Void. From 1984, Smith played with the Sacramento-based rock band The 77s. After recording Drowning With Land In Sight in 1994, Smith left The 77s to join Rich Mullins's A Ragamuffin Band.Smith has recorded and toured with dozens of other artists over the years, including Jimmy Abegg, Michael W. Smith, Margaret Becker, Vector, dc Talk, Rick Elias, Mitch McVicker, Riki Michele, Cindy Morgan, Sixpence None the Richer, Engelbert Humperdinck, Charlie Peacock, Romeo Void,  and Steve Scott.An autographed pair of Smith's drumsticks can be found in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, right next to a pair of sticks used by Beatles drummer Ringo Starr. References  Selected discography  Sky's the Limit The Temptations, 1971 album Solid Rock The Temptations, 1972 album Masterpiece The Temptations, 1973 album Mannequin Virtue, Vector, 1983 album Instincts, Romeo Void, 1984 album All Fall Down, The 77s, 1984 album The 77s, The 77s, 1987 album 88, The 77s, 1988 album Special The Temptations, 1989 album Sticks and Stones, The 77s, 1990 album Pray Naked, The 77s, 1992 album Drowning with Land in Sight, The 77s, 1994 album Emperors of Soul The Temptations, 1994 boxed set Brother's Keeper, Rich Mullins, 1995 album The Jesus Record, Rich Mullins, 1998 album Prayers of a Ragamuffin, A Ragamuffin Band, 2000 album    External links
Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein  Bud Abbott and Lou Costello Meet Frankenstein - the film's poster title - or Bud Abbott Lou Costello Meet Frankenstein - the onscreen title - (although the film is often referred to as simply Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein) is a 1948 American comedy horror film directed by Charles Barton and starring the comedy team of Abbott and Costello.  It is the first of several films where the comedy duo meets classic characters from Universal's horror film stable. In this film, they encounter Count Dracula, Frankenstein's monster and the Wolf Man, while subsequent films pair the duo with the Mummy, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, and the Invisible Man. On a TV special in the early 1950s, the two did a sketch where they interacted with the latest original Universal Studios monster being promoted at the time, the Creature from the Black Lagoon (1954).  The film is considered the swan song for the "Big Three" Universal horror monsters – Count Dracula, the Wolf Man and Frankenstein's monster – although it does not appear to fit within the loose continuity of the earlier films.In 2001, the United States Library of Congress deemed this film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry, and in September 2007, Readers Digest selected the movie as one of the top 100 funniest films of all time. The 1948 film is recognized by historians as the definitive end point to the American golden age of the monster mash and the classic Universal monster cycle. W. Scott Poole, Monsters in America: Our Historical Obsession with the Hideous and the Haunting (Waco, Texas: Baylor, 2011), 108.  Plot  The film opens with Larry Talbot (Lon Chaney, Jr.) making an urgent call from London to a Florida railway station where Chick Young (Bud Abbott) and Wilbur Grey (Lou Costello) work as baggage-clerks. Talbot tries to impart to Wilbur the danger of a shipment to the "McDougal House Of Horrors" (a local wax museum) which purportedly contain the actual bodies of Count Dracula (Béla Lugosi) and the Frankenstein Monster (Glenn Strange). However, before he is able, a full moon rises and Talbot becomes The Wolf Man and the call disconnects. Wilbur, thinking the call is just a crank, continues on with his work day. Immediately thereafter, the actual Mr. McDougal (Frank Ferguson) shows up to claim the shipments and, fearing them damaged whenever Wilbur and Chick mishandle them, demands that the crates be delivered in person so his insurance agent can inspect them.When Chick and Wilbur get to McDougal's "House Of Horrors", they open the first crate and find a coffin with "Dracula" inscribed on the front. When Chick leaves to retrieve the second crate, Wilbur witnesses Dracula awaken and tries to get Chick's attention. But when Chick returns with the second crate, Dracula hides just in time to go unnoticed.  After Chick leaves again to greet McDougal and the insurance agent, Dracula hypnotizes Wilbur and re-animates Frankenstein's Monster. McDougal and the insurance agent (with Chick in tow) arrive again too late to witness anything. Finding the storage crates empty, McDougal accuses the boys of theft and has them arrested.That night, Dr. Sandra Mornay (Lénore Aubert) receives Dracula and the Monster at her island castle. Sandra, a gifted surgeon who has studied Dr. Frankenstein's notebooks, has been posing as Wilbur's girlfriend as part of Dracula's scheme to replace the Monster's brutish brain with a more pliable one — Wilbur's.Wilbur and Chick are bailed out of jail and mistakenly believe Sandra to be their benefactor. It is actually Joan Raymond (Jane Randolph), who is secretly working for the insurance company that is processing McDougal's claim, and hopes Wilbur will lead her to the missing "exhibits". Meanwhile, Larry Talbot has taken the apartment across the hall from Wilbur and Chick. He has tracked Dracula and the Monster from Europe and knows them to be alive. Talbot asks Chick and Wilbur to help him find and destroy Dracula and the Monster. The next day, Joan Raymond comes to Chick and Wilbur's apartment and feigns love for Wilbur.  Wilbur, not expecting the favor but embracing it, invites Joan to the masquerade ball that evening.  That night, Wilbur, Chick and Joan go to Sandra's castle to pick her up for the ball. While the ladies powder their noses, Wilbur answers a telephone call from someone wanting to speak to a 'Dr Leighos'. It is Talbot, who informs them that they are in fact in the "House of Dracula". Wilbur reluctantly agrees to search the castle with Chick, and soon stumbles upon an underground passageway, complete with boat and dock. Chick insists they search for Dracula and the Monster in an attempt to prove to Wilbur that they do not really exist. Wilbur experiences a few close calls when he is  confronted by the monsters and every time he tries to show them to Chuck they have disappeared. Meanwhile, Joan has discovered Dr. Frankenstein's notebook in Sandra's bureau and Sandra has discovered Joan's insurance company employee I.D. in her purse.After the women re-join the men, a suavely dressed Dr. Leighos, (a.k.a. Dracula) descends the castle stairs and introduces himself to Joan and the boys.  Also working at the castle is the naive Prof. Stevens (Charles Bradstreet), who questions some of the specialized equipment that has arrived. After Wilbur admits that he was in the basement, Sandra feigns a headache and tells Wilbur and the others that they will have to go to the ball without her. In private, Sandra admits that Stevens' questions, Joan's credentials, and Wilbur's curiosity in the basement have made her nervous enough to put the experiment on hold. Impatient, Dracula asserts his will by hypnotizing her, biting her in the throat, and making her his vampire slave.At the ball, the boys encounter Talbot and McDougal just as Dracula and Sandra rejoin the group. Dracula, when confronted by Talbot, easily deflects accusations that he is "the real thing" by insisting that it's only his costume and he is not actually Dracula. While Dracula takes Joan for a dance, Sandra lures Wilbur to a quiet spot in the woods. Before she can move in and bite him, Chick and Larry approach and she flees. As they search for Joan, Talbot transforms into the Wolf Man and stalks Wilbur. Wilbur escapes, but the Wolf Man finds and injures McDougal. Noting that Chick has brought a wolf mask as his costume to the ball, McDougal concludes that it was Chick who actually attacked him out of revenge. Chick manages to slip away, only to witness Dracula hypnotizing Wilbur. Chick is then also hypnotized and rendered helpless while Dracula and Sandra bring Wilbur and Joan back to the castle. The next morning, Chick and Talbot meet and Talbot tells Chick that he is the Wolf Man. After Chick explains to him that Dracula has taken Wilbur and Joan to the island they agree to work together to rescue them. While Wilbur is being held in a pillory, Sandra finally explains to him the plan to transplant his brain into the Monster. She and Dracula leave him to prepare the Monster for the operation. Chick and Talbot arrive to rescue Wilbur, but in an attempt to escape Dracula hypnotizes Wilbur into coming back. Wilbur who is now strapped to a slab witnesses Dracula giving the Monster electrical boosts in the lab. Just as Sandra prepares to open Wilbur's skull, Talbot and Chick storm in. Talbot struggles with Sandra and casts her aside. Chick knocks out Sandra and runs out of the lab to make Dracula leave so Talbot can save Wilbur. Just as Talbot is about to untie Wilbur, he once again transforms into the Wolf Man. Dracula returns to the lab to find the Wolf Man there and flees, with the Wolf Man giving chase. Chick arrives to untie Wilbur just as the Monster, now at full power, breaks his own restraints and rises from his stretcher. Sandra attempts to order him back, but the Monster defiantly throws her out the lab window to her death. Chick and Wilbur try to escape with the Monster hot on their trail.After trying to fight off the Wolf Man with little success, Dracula attempts to escape and transforms into a bat, but the Wolf Man snares him then grab him and fall down to the sea below .Joan abruptly wakes from her trance, while the boys escape the castle and head to the pier with the Monster in pursuit. Wilbur succeeds in untying the boat, while Stevens and Joan arrive and set the pier ablaze. The Monster turns around and marches into the flames, succumbing as the pier collapses into the water.Just as Chick and Wilbur relax, Wilbur scolds Chick for not believing him. After Chick tells him he will believe him from now on, they hear a disembodied voice (provided by an uncredited Vincent Price) and see a cigarette floating in the air. The voice says: "Allow me to introduce myself, I'm the Invisible Man!" The boys jump off the boat and swim away while the Invisible Man lights his cigarette and laughs as the final scene comes to a close. Cast  Bud Abbott as Chick Young Lou Costello as Wilbur Grey Lon Chaney Jr. as Lawrence Talbot/The Wolf Man Béla Lugosi as Count Dracula Glenn Strange as Frankenstein's Monster Lenore Aubert as Dr. Sandra Mornay Jane Randolph as Joan Raymond Frank Ferguson as Mr. McDougal Charles Bradstreet as Prof. Stevens Vincent Price as The Invisible Man (voice cameo)   Production notes  The film was originally intended to be titled The Brain of Frankenstein, but its name was changed prior to the filming schedule, which ran from February 5 through March 20, 1948. Walter Lantz, noted for the creation of Woody Woodpecker, provided the animation for Dracula's transformations. In a 1996 documentary, 100 Years of Horror, hosted by Christopher Lee, it was revealed that the studio hired two additional comedians to add laughs between takes on the set. Costello hated the script. Furmanek, Bob; Palumbo, Ron (1991). Abbott and Costello in Hollywood. New York: Perigee Books. ISBN 0-399-51605-0  He said that his five-year-old daughter could have written something better, but later warmed to the film during production. During filming, Glenn Strange found Costello so funny he would often break up laughing, necessitating many retakes (this is readily apparent in the scene where Costello sits on the Monster's lap). There were several pie fights between takes as well, but Abbott and Costello respected the three monsters (Chaney as the Wolfman, Lugosi as Dracula and Strange as the Monster) and made sure no pies were flung at the heavily made-up actors. Boris Karloff was approached to play the Monster once again but declined. He did, however, help promote the film and can be seen in several publicity photos, including one where he is buying a ticket, even though he refused to actually see the film (considering it an insult to horror movies). During the scene in the laboratory where the Monster comes after Chick and Wilbur after throwing Sandra through the window, Glenn Strange stepped on a camera cable, causing the camera to fall and break some bones in his foot. Lon Chaney, who was not working that day and who had previously played the Monster in Ghost of Frankenstein, took over the role of the Monster for that scene as well as the scene where the monster is throwing barrels and crates at Wilbur and Chick while they are trying to escape in a rowboat at the pier. Glut, Donald F. (1973). The Frankenstein Legend: A Tribute to Mary Shelley and Boris Karloff. Metuchen, NJ: The Scarcrow Press, Inc. ISBN 0-8108-0589-8  This was the only time Béla Lugosi reprised the famous role he had created in Dracula (1931). He had previously portrayed vampires in Mark of the Vampire (1935), The Return of the Vampire (1944) and would do so again in  Mother Riley Meets the Vampire (1952) ( and made a gag cameo as Dracula in a 1933 Hollywood on Parade short), but this was the only other time he played Dracula as a sustained role on film.       The final scene with the Invisible Man presaged Abbott and Costello Meet the Invisible Man (1951), though Price did not star, and all characters were different. Vincent Price had appeared however in The Invisible Man Returns (1940).   Film mistakes  At one point in the film, where Abbott and Costello's characters are going through the revolving panel, Costello calls Abbott by his real name instead of his character's name.    Dracula's reflection can be seen in the mirror when he makes Dr. Mornay his next victim. In previous Universal horror films, (notably Lugosi's Dracula and House of Dracula with John Carradine), the undead could be recognized because they cast no reflection. However, this bit of lore had not been established within the context of the Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein script.    When the Frankenstein Monster breaks free of his bonds on the operating table in the climactic chase/fight scene, one of his neck electrodes clearly pulls off of his neck.    When Costello is next to Dracula's coffin at the beginning of the film, the information card says "Frankenstein's monster" until the camera moves and it changes to "Dracula's legend."   Awards and honorsAmerican Film Institute recognition  2000: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs #56   RoutinesThe "moving candle" routine previously used in Hold That Ghost (1941) was utilized again in this film. Reissues and home media releasesAbbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein was re-released theatrically by Realart in 1956 on a co-bill with Abbott and Costello Meet the Killer, Boris Karloff.After being released several times on VHS in the 80's and 90's, the film was released three times on DVD.  Originally released as a single DVD on August 29, 2000, it was re-released twice as part of two different Abbott and Costello collections, The Best of Abbott and Costello Volume Three, on August 3, 2004, and again on October 28, 2008 as part of Abbott and Costello: The Complete Universal Pictures Collection. Its blu-ray debut and DVD re-release is scheduled for September 4, 2012 as part of Universal's 100th Anniversary series. References  External links
Abdel-Razak al-Yehiyeh Lieutenant General Abdel-Razak al-Yehiyeh or Abdul-Razzaq Al-Yahya (born March 15, 1929 in Tantura, near Haifa, then in the British Mandate of Palestine), also known as Abu Anas, is the Interior Minister of the Palestinian National Authority.Al-Yehiyeh trained as a military strategist and served as chief operations officer and then deputy chief-of-staff of the PLA brigade in Syria before 1967. In August 1968, he led an attempt to make PLA Syria brigades more independent of Syrian control, and was made PLA chief-of-staff by the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) Executive Committee. But with Syria opposed, he resigned to become military advisor to the PLO Executive Committee from 1969 and chief-of-staff of the Palestinian Armed Struggle Command (PASC) in February 1969. He was reappointed to the PLA as commander-in-chief by the PLO Executive Committee in June 1969. Then when Yasser Arafat took on that role in September 1970, al-Yehiyeh became chief-of-staff of all Palestinian forces. Due to Syrian pressure, he was replaced in 1971, becoming director of the PLO's political department from 1971 to 1976, He was a member of the PLO Executive Committee from 1984 to 1991. Al-Yehiyeh headed security committees in talks with Israel from 1993, including final status talks, and also headed negotiations on Hebron security arrangements and safe passage. He was appointed as Interior Minister of the Palestinian Authority in June 2002, charged with overhauling Palestinian security forces. He was a member of the three-man delegation to Washington in August 2000. He was involved in security talks with Israel, and headed a centralized security apparatus for the Palestinian Authority. Al-Yehiyeh left the PA cabinet in late 2002, feeling that Arafat had prevented him from making any significant reforms. He published his book Between militarism and politics in 2006, and he is now working on publishing a new book about peace negotiations between the Palestinian National Authority PNA and Israel.He was appointed Interior Minister on June 15, 2007.  External links and references  Sedan, Gil, "Israel doubts Arafat will deliver on reform efforts". Jewish Telegraphic Agency, Friday June 7, 2002. "New Palestinian interior minister a retired military man", CNN. June 10, 2002. (Name misspelt) " Palestinian Personalities". " Jewish Virtual Library ". " Times Magazine ".
Acorn Archimedes  The Acorn Archimedes was Acorn Computers' first general purpose home computer to be based on their own ARM architecture.Using a RISC design with a 32-bit CPU, at its launch in June 1987, the Archimedes was stated as running at 4 MIPS, with a claim of 18 MIPS during tests. The name is commonly used to describe any of Acorn's contemporary designs based on the same architecture, even where Acorn did not include Archimedes in the official name. Description and history  Early models  The first models were released in June 1987, as the 300 and 400 series. The 400 series included 4 expansion slots (although a 2 slot backplane could be added to the 300 series as an official upgrade, and third parties produced their own 4 slot backplanes) and an ST506 controller for an internal hard drive. Both models included the Arthur operating system (later replaced by RISC OS as a paid-for upgrade), BBC BASIC programming language and an emulator for Acorn's earlier BBC Micro, and were mounted in two-part cases with a small central unit, monitor on top, and a separate keyboard and three-button mouse.  All models featured onboard 8 channel stereo sound and were capable of displaying 256 colours on screen.Four models were initially released with different amounts of memory, the A305, A310, A410 and A440. The 540 was unveiled in September 1990, and included higher speed SCSI and provision for connecting Genlock devices.  The 300 and 400 were followed by a number of machines with minor changes and upgrades: A3000 and A5000Work began on a successor to the Arthur operating system — initially named Arthur 2, but with the release of the Hollywood movie of the same name , it was renamed to RISC OS 2. New computers were shipped with it pre-installed. A number of new machines were introduced along with RISC OS 2 and in May 1989, the 300 series was phased out in favour of the new Acorn A3000 (the 400 series was kept in production).  Earlier models which shipped with Arthur could be upgraded to RISC OS 2 by replacing the ROM chips containing the operating system.The A3000 used an 8 MHz ARM2 and was supplied with   of RAM.  Unlike the previous models, the A3000 came in a single-part case similar to the BBC Micro, Amiga 500 and Atari ST computers, with the keyboard integrated in the base unit. This kind of housing consumes a lot of desktop space, a problem that Acorn tried to overcome by offering a monitor stand that attached to the base unit. The new model sported only a single internal expansion slot, which was physically different from that of the earlier models, although electronically similar.  An external connector could interface to existing expansion cards, although they really needed to be housed in an external case joined to the main unit.A300 series, A400 series, R140 and A3000 machines had the VIDC1a video chip, which provided a wide variety of screen resolutions:  160 × 256 with 4, 16 or 256 colours 320 × 256 with 2, 4, 16 or 256 colours 640 × 256 with 2, 4, 16 or 256 colours 640 × 512 with 2, 4, 16 or 256 colours 1152 × 896 with 2 colours.  The palette range was 4096 colours (12-bit) and the VIDC1a had 16 hardware palette registers. This meant that in screen modes with sixteen colours or fewer, the colours could be mapped to any of the 4096 available. However, in 256 colour modes, 4 bits of the colour data were hardware derived and could not be adjusted. The net result was 256 colours, but only 16 of them could be assigned as desired, covering a range of the 4096 available colours.  It also had no Horizontal sync interrupt, meaning that it was difficult to display additional colours by changing the palette for each scan line, but not impossible, thanks to the 2 MHz IOC timer 1.  Many demos managed to display 4096 colour on screen or more with dithering   It had also one hardware sprite, with 32 pixels width and unlimited height, where each pixel is coded on 2 bits: value 0 is for transparency, and the 3 others are freely chosen from the 4096 colour palette.   In 1991, the A5000 was launched. It featured the new 25 MHz ARM3 processor, 2 or 4MB of RAM, either a 40 MB or an 80 MB hard drive and a more conventional 2U rack pizza box-style two-part case (HxWxD: 100 x 430 x 340 mm  ). Its enhanced video capabilities allowed the A5000 to comfortably display VGA resolutions of up to 800×600 pixels. It was the first Archimedes to feature a High Density capable floppy disc drive as standard. This natively supported various formats including DOS and Atari discs. A later version of the A5000 featured a 33 MHz ARM3, 4 or 8 MB of RAM, an 80 or 120 MB hard drive.The A5000 initially ran the new 3.0 version of RISC OS, although several bugs were identified; most were shipped with RISC OS 3.10 or 3.11. As before, earlier machines were capable of being upgraded to the new RISC OS 3, though some needed help,  as well as the ARM3 CPU.  Earlier models could also benefit from the video performance of the A5000 via a third party upgrade.  New range and a laptop  In 1992, a new range was produced, the first ARM macrocell: the ARM250 microprocessor, a single-chip design including an ARM3 chip without cache, and the IOC1 (Input Output Controller), VIDC1a (VIDeo and sound Controller) and MEMC1 (MEMory Controller) chips all integrated into one chip. The increase in clock frequency, from 8 MHz to 12 MHz, gave a performance of 7 MIPS. They run RISC OS 3.10.  The A30x0 series had a one-piece design, similar to the A3000 but far smaller, while the A4000 looked like a slightly slimmer A5000. The A3010 model was intended to be a home computing machine, featuring a TV modulator and joystick ports, while the A3020 targeted the home office and educational markets, featuring a built-in 2.5" hard drive and a dedicated network interface socket. Technically, the A4000 was almost identical to the A3020, only differing in hard disk size (3.5" in the A4000), though it sported a different appearance.  All three ARM250-based machines could be upgraded to 4 MB with plug-in chips (though the A3010 was designed for 2 MB, third party upgrades overcame this) and one "mini-podule" slot as used for internal expansion in the A3000.Also in 1992, Acorn introduced a laptop computer called A4 that featured an ARM3 processor like the A5000, even though it had a slightly lower clock speed, and a LCD screen capable of displaying a maximum resolution of   in 15 levels of grey. However, it did feature a monitor port which offered the same display capabilities as an A5000. A notable omission from the machine was a built-in pointing device, requiring users to navigate with the cursor keys or attach a conventional Acorn three-button mouse. The A7000, despite its name being reminiscent of the Archimedes naming conventions, was actually more similar to the Risc PC, the line of RISC OS computers that succeeded the Archimedes in 1994.  It lacked, however, the DEBI expansion slots and multi-slice case that characterized the RiscPC (though by removing the CDROM, a backplane with one slot could be fitted). List of models   Model Memory (RAM) Hard disk space ARM core Launch date UK retail price at launch Notes  BBC Archimedes 305 512 KB (512 KB)  ARM2 July 1987 £799       BBC Archimedes 310 1 MB (1 MB)  ARM2 July 1987 £875     BBC Archimedes 310M 1 MB  ARM2 July 1987 Unknown Includes PC emulation software  Acorn Archimedes 410 1 MB  ARM2 July 1987 £1399     Acorn Archimedes 440 4 MB 20 MB ARM2 July 1987 £2299     BBC A3000 1 MB  ARM2 May 1989 £649     This model was the last ever BBC Microcomputer  Acorn Archimedes 410/1 1 MB - (ST506 interface on motherboard) ARM2 June 1989 £999 Improved MEMC1A memory controller over previous 410 model  Acorn Archimedes 420/1 2 MB 20 MB ST506 ARM2 June 1989 £1099   Acorn Archimedes 440/1 4 MB 40 MB ST506 ARM2 June 1989 £1299 Improved MEMC1A memory controller over previous 440 model  Acorn R140 4 MB 47 MB ST506 ARM2 June 1989 £3,500 RISC iX workstation  Acorn Archimedes 540 4 MB (max 16 MB) 100 MB SCSI ARM3 June 1990 £2499   Acorn R225 4 MB  ARM3 July 1990 £3000 RISC iX network workstation  Acorn R260 8 MB 100 MB SCSI ARM3 July 1990 £5000 RISC iX workstation  Acorn A5000 1, 2, 4 or 8 MB 20 MB to 160 MB IDE ARM3 September 1991 £999 or £1499 25->33 MHz ARM3 processor, launched with various sub-models  Acorn A4 2 MB or 4 MB 40 MB or 60 MB IDE (2.5") ARM3 June 1992 £1399 or £1699 Notebook model with ARM3 processor clocked at 24 MHz (1 MHz slower than usual), 640x480 greyscale LCD screen  Acorn A3010 1 MB  ARM2/ARM250 September 1992 £499 ARM250 processor (early models had an ARM2 mezzanine processor  codenamed "Adelaide")  Acorn A3020 2 MB 0 MB - 80 MB IDE (2.5") ARM250 September 1992 £799   Acorn A4000 2 MB 0 MB - 210 MB IDE ARM250 September 1992 £999   Also produced, but never sold commercially were:  A500: 4 RAM, ST506 interface, Archimedes development machine  A680 and M4: 8 MB RAM, SCSI on motherboard, RISC iX development machines   Significance and impact The Archimedes was one of the most powerful home computers available during the late 1980s and early 1990s; its main CPU was faster than the 68000 microprocessors found in the more popular Commodore Amiga and Atari ST machines.  An   68000 had an average performance of roughly   for 16-bit workloads and   for 32-bit workloads, with peak performance of   for simpler 16-bit instructions. The   ARM2 yielded   for 32-bit workloads in repeatable benchmark tests.  (The Archimedes did not have the custom graphics chips that the Amiga did, however, such as the "Fat Agnus" chip with its powerful bit blitter that made the Amiga very fast at bitmap manipulation; the Archimedes outperformed the Amiga easily for 3D applications but the Amiga retained an edge in 2D. )  The computer was exhibited at the 1987 Personal Computer World Show, along with Amigas, Atari STs and video game consoles. Commenting on the show, Crash magazine reported that "despite whiz-bang demos of Acorn’s Archimedes" the 8-bit machines were not dead. The Archimedes won significant market share in the education markets of the UK, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand; the success of the Archimedes in British schools was due partly to its predecessor the BBC Micro and later to the Computers for Schools scheme organised by the Tesco supermarket chain in association with Acorn, and most students and pupils in these countries in the early 90s were exposed to an Archimedes or A-series computer. The Archimedes range was available in the US and Canada via Olivetti Canada.  Despite a technical edge , the Archimedes only ever met a moderate success beyond the education sector, becoming a 'minority' platform outside of certain niche markets. These niche markets included professional work such as radio, medical and railway station management and music publishing .By the early 1990s, the UK educational market began to turn away from the Archimedes. Apple Macintosh computers or IBM compatible PCs eclipsed the Archimedes in their multimedia capabilities, which led to an erosion of the Archimedes market share. The Tesco Computers for Schools scheme later changed partnership from Acorn to RM plc and many other computer-related suppliers, which also led to the decrease of the Archimedes' educational market share. See also   The Fourth Dimension (company) Category:Acorn Archimedes games   References  External links   Acorn systems page at Old-Computers.com Acorn Archimedes at Flatbatteries Chris's Acorns: Archimedes
Ada Adler  Ada Sara Adler (1878–1946) was a Danish classical scholar and librarian.She is best known for her critical, standard edition of the Suda, which she published in 5 volumes (Leipzig, 1928–1938). She also contributed several articles to Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopädie.Her father's sister, Ellen Adler Bohr, was the mother of Niels Bohr and Harald Bohr.During World War II, she was evacuated to Sweden with other Danish Jews. She taught Greek in the Danish school in Lund.In 1916, she published a catalog of Greek manuscripts in the Royal Library, Copenhagen.  In 1931, she was awarded the Tagea Brandt Rejselegat. At the time of her death she had made substantial progress towards a first edition of the Etymologicum Genuinum, a project continued under the direction of Klaus Alpers. Works  1916: Catalogue supplémentaire des manuscrits grecs de la Bibliothèque Royale de Copenhague.  1917: D. G. Moldenhawer og hans haandskriftsamling, Copenhagen
Adam Sandler    Adam Richard Sandler (born September 9, 1966) is an American actor, comedian, screenwriter, musician, and film producer. After becoming a Saturday Night Live cast member, Sandler went on to star in several Hollywood feature films that grossed over $100 million at the box office.  He is best known for his comedic roles, such as in the films Billy Madison (1995), Happy Gilmore (1996), The Waterboy (1998), Big Daddy (1999), and Mr. Deeds (2002), though he has ventured into more dramatic territory. In 1999, Sandler founded Happy Madison, a film and television production company that has produced numerous films and developed the 2007 television series Rules of Engagement. Early lifeSandler was born in Brooklyn, New York to Jewish parents,  Stanley, an electrical engineer, and Judy Sandler, a nursery school teacher.  When he was five, his family moved to Manchester, New Hampshire, where he attended Manchester Central High School. He found he was a natural comic, and nurtured his talent while at New York University by performing regularly in clubs and on campuses. Sandler graduated from NYU's Tisch School of the Arts in 1988. Later in his career, he would draw on his earliest experiences for material for his comedy, music and movies. The song "Lunchlady Land" from his debut album They're All Gonna Laugh at You! is dedicated to Emalee, the lunchlady at Hayden Dining Hall at New York University.  Career Acting career In the mid to late 1980s, Sandler played Theo Huxtable's friend, Smitty, on The Cosby Show (1987–1988). He was a performer for the MTV game show Remote Control, on which he made appearances as the characters "Trivia Delinquent" or "Stud Boy". Early in his career, Sandler performed in comedy clubs, taking the stage at his brother's urging when he was seventeen. He was discovered by comedian Dennis Miller, who caught Sandler's act in Los Angeles. Miller recommended him to Saturday Night Live producer Lorne Michaels. Sandler was hired as a writer for SNL in 1990 and became a featured player the following year, making a name for himself by performing amusing original songs on the show, including "The Chanukah Song".  Sandler told Conan O'Brien on The Tonight Show that NBC fired him and Chris Farley from the show in 1995. "You're not alone, Conan O'Brien: Adam Sandler says NBC fired him and Chris Farley from 'SNL'" Joe Dziemianowicz, New York Daily News, January 21, 2010. In 1994 he co-starred in Airheads with Brendan Fraser and Steve Buscemi. He starred in Billy Madison (1995) as a grown, though uneducated, man repeating grades 1–12 to earn back his father's respect, along with the right to inherit his father's multi-million-dollar hotel empire. In At the Movies, Siskel and Ebert gave the film a very bad review, and said of Sandler "...Not an attractive screen presence, he might have a career as a villain or a fall guy or the butt of a joke, but as the protagonist his problem is he creates the fingernails on the blackboard" with Siskel adding "...you don't have a good motivation for the character's behavior".    He followed this film with other financially successful comedies such as Bulletproof (1996), Happy Gilmore (1996) and The Wedding Singer (1998). He was initially cast in the bachelor-party-themed comedy/thriller Very Bad Things (1998), but had to back out due to his involvement in The Waterboy (1998), one of his first hits.Although his earlier films did not receive critical praise, his more recent films, beginning with Punch-Drunk Love (2002), have received more positive reviews - although they lack the meagre humour of his earlier films. Roger Ebert, in his review of Punch-Drunk Love, concluded that Sandler had been wasted in earlier films with poorly written scripts and characters with no development.  Sandler has moved outside the genre of slapstick comedy to take on more serious parts such as the aforementioned Punch-Drunk Love (for which he was nominated for a Golden Globe), Spanglish (2004) and Reign Over Me (2007). He played a loving father figure in Big Daddy (1999). During filming, he met Jacqueline Samantha Titone—his future wife and mother of his two daughters -— who was cast as the waitress from The Blarney Stone Bar. At one point, Sandler was considered for the part that went to Jamie Foxx in Collateral (2004). He also was one of the finalists along with Jim Carrey and Johnny Depp for the role of Willy Wonka in Tim Burton's Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (2005).  He returned to more dramatic  fare with Mike Binder's Reign Over Me (2007), a drama about a man who loses his entire family in 9/11 and rekindles a friendship with his old college roommate (played by Don Cheadle). He starred in the film I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry (2007) alongside Kevin James, as a New York City fireman pretending to be gay to keep up an insurance scam so that his best friend's children can have benefits. Sandler headlined You Don't Mess with the Zohan (2008), a comedy about a Mossad agent who fakes his own death and moves to the United States to become a hair stylist. The film was written by Sandler, The 40-Year-Old Virgin writer-director Judd Apatow (who was an old roommate of Sandler's when both were starting out), and Triumph, the Insult Comic Dog creator Robert Smigel, and was directed by Happy Gilmore director Dennis Dugan."Like Will Ferrell, Sandler has layers of tenderness under layers of irony under layers of tenderness—plus a floating anger like Jupiter’s great red spot," wrote David Edelstein of New York magazine in a review of You Don't Mess with the Zohan. "Some performers become stars because we can read them instantly, others—like Sandler—because we never tire of trying to get a fix on them."  Sandler starred in Bedtime Stories (2008), a fantasy film directed by Bringing Down the House director Adam Shankman, about a stressed hotel maintenance worker whose bedtime stories he reads to his niece and nephew begin to come true. This marked Sandler's first family film and first film under the Walt Disney banner.  Keri Russell and English comedian Russell Brand co-starred.In 2009, Sandler starred in Judd Apatow's third directorial feature Funny People. He played a very successful stand up comedian who finds out he has a terminal illness and he takes a young inexperienced comic, played by Seth Rogen, under his wing. Filming began in October 2008 and finished in January 2009. The film was released on July 31, 2009.  At one point, Sandler was in talks to star in Quentin Tarantino's World War II film Inglourious Basterds, which he confirmed, but he did not appear in it due to a scheduling conflict with Funny People.   Following the release of Funny People, it, along with Punch-Drunk Love were cited in the June 2010 announcement that Sandler was one of 135 people (including 20 actors) invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Sandler appeared in Grown Ups, teaming up with Kevin James, Chris Rock, Rob Schneider, and David Spade (all of whom have worked with Sandler before) for a film about five best friends from high school who reunite 30 years later on the July 4 weekend. Other costars include Salma Hayek (playing Sandler's wife), Maria Bello (playing James' wife), and fellow SNL alumna Maya Rudolph (playing Rock's wife), Colin Quinn, Tim Meadows, and Norm Macdonald. Sandler and Dickie Roberts scribe Fred Wolf wrote the script and Dennis Dugan directed the film. Sandler starred in the 2011 film Just Go with It, with Jennifer Aniston, a romantic comedy written by Allan Loeb and Tim Dowling and directed by Dennis Dugan. He played a plastic surgeon who asks his office manager, played by Aniston, to pose as his wife, in order to prove his honesty to his much younger girlfriend, played by Brooklyn Decker. Sandler also provided the voice of a capuchin monkey in Kevin James' Zookeeper, released on July 8, 2011.  In 2012, he starred in That's My Boy with Andy Samberg. The film was about a man, played by Sandler, who fathered a son, played by Samberg, with his teacher in high school. Then, years later, he visits his son on the eve of his wedding and clashes with the bride (Leighton Meester).In 2011, Sandler pulled off an extraordinary double in which he won both Worst Actor and Worst Actress at the Golden Raspberry Awards for his film Jack and Jill.  Not only was he the first person to win both awards, but he also was the first male actor to win the Worst Actress dishonor. The film also won every other award, becoming the first film to sweep the Golden Raspberry Awards. Happy Madison Productions Sandler formed his film production company, Happy Madison Productions, "Happy Madison." AdamSandler.com. Accessed October 9, 2008.  in 1999, first producing fellow SNL alumnus Rob Schneider's film Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo. Happy Madison has produced all of Sandler's subsequent films to date with the exceptions Punch Drunk Love and Spanglish. Reign Over Me and Funny People were produced by Happy Madison but under the subsidiary label "Madison 23".Sandler is known for consistently working with a core group of friends and associates through Happy Madison, frequently casting fellow SNL performers in various roles in his films. Sandler and Happy Madison produced SNL contemporary Rob Schneider's vehicles Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo (1999), The Animal (2001), The Hot Chick (2002), and Deuce Bigalow: European Gigolo (2005), and The Benchwarmers (2006), with Sandler making cameo appearances in the middle three. Meanwhile, Schneider has appeared in cameo roles in Sandler films The Waterboy, Little Nicky, Mr. Deeds, Click, The Longest Yard, I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry, and Bedtime Stories. Schneider had larger roles in Sandler films Big Daddy, 50 First Dates, Eight Crazy Nights, You Don't Mess with the Zohan, and Grown Ups. Happy Madison produced David Spade's Joe Dirt, Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star, and The Benchwarmers, which also featured Rob Schneider.  Spade additionally made a cameo appearance in I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry and had a prominent supporting role in Grown Ups. Sandler cameoed as a special audience member in an episode of The Showbiz Show with David Spade. SNL contemporary Kevin Nealon has appeared in ten Happy Madison productions or Sandler films, including Happy Gilmore, The Wedding Singer, Little Nicky, Joe Dirt, Eight Crazy Nights, Anger Management, Grandma's Boy, You Don't Mess with the Zohan, Just Go With It and the Dana Carvey vehicle, The Master of Disguise.Happy Madison also produced Paul Blart: Mall Cop, the first starring vehicle for Kevin James. James had costarred with Sandler in I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry and Grown Ups and made a cameo appearance in You Don't Mess with the Zohan. Happy Madison also produced James' second starring vehicle Zookeeper.He appeared as the featured guest on the final episode of John McEnroe's eponymous CNBC talk show, airing in late 2004. McEnroe appeared as himself in three of Sandler's films (Mr. Deeds, Anger Management, and You Don't Mess with the Zohan).Anna Faris, who appeared in The Hot Chick, became the first female actor to headline a production for Happy Madison with The House Bunny and will headline another film for Happy Madison in the near future.Others who frequently appear in Sandler films include Steve Buscemi, Chris Rock, John Turturro, Jon Lovitz, Clint Howard, Norm Macdonald, Nick Swardson, and longtime friends Allen Covert, Peter Dante, and Jonathan Loughran. Covert starred in his first leading role in Grandma's Boy, also produced by Happy Madison productions. Personal life On June 22, 2003, Sandler married actress Jacqueline Samantha Titone. The couple have two daughters: Sadie Madison Sandler (born 2006)  and Sunny Madeline Sandler (born 2008).  Sandler lives with his family in Los Angeles, but also owns homes in New York City and Florida.  Political and charitable donationsIn 2007, Sandler made a $1 million donation to the Boys and Girls Club in his hometown, Manchester, New Hampshire.  He donated $2,100 to Republican Rudy Giuliani's presidential campaign the same year.  Filmography  Discography  Title Year Notes  They're All Gonna Laugh at You! 1993 2× Platinum  What the Hell Happened to Me? 1996 2× Platinum  What's Your Name? 1997 Gold  Stan and Judy's Kid 1999 Gold  Shhh...Don't Tell 2004    References  External links     Official website
Adamari López     Adamari López Torres (born May 18, 1971 in Humacao, Puerto Rico)    is a Puerto Rican actress famous for participating in several Puerto Rican and Mexican soap operas. She is currently a host on the Telemundo morning show Un Nuevo Día. Early careerThe daughter of an undertaker, Luis López, Adamari started her career at the age of six in the Telemundo Canal 2 production of the Cristina Bazán soap opera, alongside legendary Puerto Rican actress Johanna Rosaly and Venezuelan singer José Luis Rodríguez, El Puma.Her talent indicated a future superstar. WAPA-TV next chose her to play Iris Chacón and Daniel Guerrero's daughter in Yo sé que mentía. She was then nine years old, and was given one of the most important roles of the story. López became a household name.A short, two chapter appearance on Vivir Para Ti followed in 1983, and after that, López decided to dedicate herself to her studies. She holds a B.A. in Communications from the University of the Sacred Heart in Puerto Rico. Adulthood and fameAfter reaching the age of maturity, she came back, participating in several plays at Puerto Rico's Teatro Tapia, San Juan's premier and oldest theater, and getting the attention of Mexican producers.She traveled to Mexico next, after the invitation by the producers to try out there, and became a superstar in that country as well, working in many top soap operas, including Camila and the national super hit Amigas y Rivales. López also participated in Mujer, Casos de la Vida Real, where she played a victim of rape that later turned lesbian. Recent yearsIn 2004, the four-foot ten inch  López participated in the soap opera Mujer de Madera. During the recording of that soap opera, her father, Luis, a respected and successful undertaker, suffered a heart attack and had to be hospitalized and operated on. López was given immediate permission to travel to Puerto Rico and be with her father for as long as she needed. Her father recovered, but only five percent of his heart is currently working. López had to return to Mexico after her father was released from the hospital, but she flew back to Puerto Rico every time that the filming schedule allowed her to. In 2011, she participated in the second season of Univision's dancing show Mira Quien Baila where she was one of the top dancers and won the competition.  Personal life and relationshipsHer private life has become a favorite subject of paparazzi and gossip magazines, and her breakup from actor Mauricio Islas was well published. López was the wife of fellow Puerto Rican singing super star Luis Fonsi. In 2006, Lopez and Fonsi announced they would be getting married during the summer of that year. They were married on June 3, 2006 in Puerto Rico. On November 8, 2009, Adamari López and Luis Fonsi released a joint statement where they announced they were separating. Officially, on November 8, 2010 they divorced.In June 2010, Adamari López was seen publicly on various occasions with Colombian writer Andres López López. It was rumored that they were dating but neither officially came out and confirmed it.  In 2011 Adamari participated in television show Mira Quien Baila where she turned out to be the series winner and also met her current boyfriend Toni Costa, a professional dancer from Spain. Adamari and Toni celebrated their 1 year anniversary on October 9th, 2012.  HealthOn March 22, 2005, López held a press conference in San Juan,  that she had been diagnosed with breast cancer. Her then-boyfriend, Luis Fonsi, announced at the same press conference that he was canceling his 2005 international tour to be by her side. She was expected to recover; her cancer was caught at "stage 1", which is a very early stage, and it did not spread to other parts of her body.She underwent cancer surgery; in 2006 it was reported that she is in remission. She has campaigned for breast cancer awareness.   Filmography Telenovelas  Year  Title  Character  2008  Alma de Hierro  Rita Anguiano de Hierro  2007  Bajo Las Riendas Del Amor  Ingrid Linares  2004  Mujer de Madera  Lucrecia Santibáñez Villalpando  2002  Gata Salvaje  Karina Rios  2001  Amigas y Rivales  Ofelia Villada  2000  Locura de Amor  Carmen Ruelas  1998  Camila  Monica Iturralde  1997  Sin Ti  Maria Elena Ysaguirre   See also  List of famous Puerto Ricans Luis Fonsi Cristina Bazán Johanna Rosaly   References  External links  Adamari page in Alma Latina Spanish fan article
Adelard of Bath      Adelard of Bath (Latin: Adelardus Bathensis) (c. 1080 – c. 1152) was a 12th-century English natural philosopher. He is known both for his original works and for translating many important Greek and Arab scientific works of astrology, astronomy, philosophy and mathematics into Latin from Arabic versions, which were then introduced to Western Europe. He is known as one of the first to introduce the Indian number system to Europe. He stands at the convergence of three intellectual schools: the traditional learning of French schools, the Greek culture of Southern Italy, and the Arabic science of the East.    BackgroundGiven the time period when he was alive, Adelard’s biography is spotty in places and leaves some aspects open to interpretation. As a result, much of what we ascribe to Adelard is a product of his own testimony.  As his name suggests, he was born in the Roman English city of Bath but how he lived is not entirely known. Despite his expansive travels, by the end of his life he had returned to Bath, where he died. Scholars are hesitant to ascribe definitive parents to the philosopher but Fastred, a tenant of the Bishop of Wells, is mostly plausibly identified as this figure.  His name (Adelard) is of Angle-Saxon origin, which would have placed him in the subordinate class, status wise, in 11th-century England.   It is believed that he left England toward the end of the 11th century for Tours, likely on the advice of Bishop John de Villula, who had moved the seat of his bishopric from Wells to Bath in 1090. During his studies in Tours, an anonymous "wise man of Tours" inspired Adelard with his interest in astronomy to study the science.    Adelard later taught for a time at Laon, leaving Laon for travel no later than 1109.   After leaving Laon, he travelled to Southern Italy and Sicily no later than 1116. Adelard also travelled extensively throughout the "lands of the Crusades": Greece, West Asia, Sicily, Spain, and potentially Palestine.  The time spent in these areas would help explain his fascination with mathematics and his access to Arabic scholars. Tarsus and Antioch. By 1126, Adelard returned to the West with the intention of spreading the knowledge he had gained about Arab astronomy and geometry to the Latin world.  One aspect of particular interest with respect to Adelard, his teachings, and the time period he grew up, was the relation to the Crusades. This time of remarkable transition marked an opportunity for someone to gain valuable influence over the evolution of human history. While the Crusades offered little in the way of a “victor,” Adelard’s nondiscriminatory scholarly work inspired him to bring back to England many ancient texts and new questions that would later give rise to an English Renaissance.  Again, given the 11th-century time period that Adelard was alive, it was understandably difficult for Adelard to have achieved his educational pursuits. In the absence of a printing press and given the weak public literacy rate, books were rare items in medieval Europe—generally held only by royal courts or Catholic monastic communities (Kraye, et. al. 1987). Fittingly, Adelard studied with monks at the Benedictine Monastery at Bath's Cathedral.  Main worksAmong Adelard of Bath's original works is a trio of dialogues, written to mimic the Platonic style, or correspondences with his nephew. The earliest of these is De Eodem et Diverso (On the Same and the Different). It is written in the style of a protreptic, or an exhortation to the study of philosophy.    The work is modelled on Boethius' Consolation of Philosophy, evident in Adelard's vocabulary and phraseology.  It is believed to have been written near Tours after he had already travelled, though there is no indication that he had travelled past Southern Italy and Sicily at the time of writing.   The work takes the form of a dramatic dialogue between Philocosmia, who advocates worldly pleasures, and Philosophia, whose defence of scholarship leads into a summary of the seven liberal arts. Underlining the entire work is the contrast between Philocosmia's res (perceptible reality), and Philosophia's verba (mental concepts).   Each section of the liberal arts is divided into two parts. Presented first is a description of the allegorical figure representing the art, in which the importance of that art is indicated, followed by a summary of the doctrines of that art, as told by the allegorical figure who is presented as the founder or main proponent of the particular art.    The second of this trio, and arguably Adelard's most significant contribution, was his Questiones Naturales or Questions on Natural Science. It can be dated between 1107 and 1133 as, in the text, Adelard himself mentions that seven years have passed since his lecturing in schools at Laon.  He chooses to present this work as a forum for Arabic learning, referring often to his experiences in Antioch.   He sets out seventy-six questions, in the form of a Platonic dialogue about meteorology and natural science. It was used heavily in schools into and beyond the 13th century but the teaching on natural things would ultimately be superseded by Aristotle’s writing.  The text is broken up into three parts: On Plants and Brute Animals, On Man and On Earth, Water, Air, and Fire.  Two of the more specific features associated with this text are (1) a preference for reason over authority in matters of science and nature (in other words, seeking solutions via reason and logic rather than through faith) and (2) the use of the literary device of invoking Arab teachings when presenting very controversial topics (i.e. that brute animals may possess knowledge and souls)    Curiously, Adelard didn't think that the use of reason to seek knowledge was in anyway contradictory with Christian faith in God. The soul is a large part of the dialogue in this text as On Man discusses a corporeal soul in man, while the final section elaborates on the incorporeal soul of elements and animals.   Questiones Naturales appears to have been an immediate success as it was copied on both sides of the English Channel and was even presented in a "pocket-book" format, suggesting that it was meant to be carried around.  The final section in his trilogy is a treatise on hawking called De Avibus Tractatus (Treatise on Birds).  It is a medical text that addresses disease from head-to-toe.  While it has been argued that this treatise was not widely distributed, an investigation of later Latin and French treatises reveals a number of excerpts from Adelard's work.   The remainder of Adelard's original works did not involve the persona of his nephew. He wrote a treatise on the use of the abacus called Regulae Abaci,  which was likely written very early in his career because it shows no trace of Arab influence.  This treatise is believed to be proof that Adelard was connected to the Exchequer table that was used for monetary calculations in the medieval period.     Further evidence for this can be found in the Pipe Roll of Henry I, which shows that he had received a discharge from the murder fine (a fine levied on inhabitants of a certain area based on the murder of a Norman that occurred in a generally accessible field in that same area)  levied on the community of Wiltshire in 1130,  though there is no other proof for this fact. The work that Adelard of Bath is known for in the Latin world is his translation of the astronomical tables of al-Khwarizmi, the first widely accessible Latin translation of the Islamic ideas about algebra.  In the Middle Ages he was known for his rediscovery and teaching of geometry, earning his reputation when he made the first full translation of Euclid's "Elements" and began the process of interpreting the text for a Western audience.  InfluenceWhen we consider the influence that Adelard had on the study of philosophy, we see his ideas most notably manifested in the later works of Robert Grosseteste and Roger Bacon.  While his work in natural philosophy is probably overshadowed by Aristotle, it still helped lay the foundations for much of the progress that was made in the later centuries. His work surrounding Euclid’s Elements, for example, was of great help in providing training that would help future scholars understand the relationships between demonstrative and geometrical proofs. While his original writings demonstrate that he had a sincere passion for the seven liberal arts (grammar, rhetoric, logic, mathematics, geometry, music, and astronomy), his work in Quaestiones naturales illustrated a more encompassing dedication to subjects such as physics, the natural sciences, and possibly even metaphysics. His influence is also evident in De philosophia mundi by William of Conches, Hugh of Saint Victor, and Isaac of Stella's Letters to Alcher on the Soul. He introduced algebra to the Latin world and his commentaries in Version III of Euclid's Elements were extremely influential in the 13th century.  Adelard also displays original thought of a scientific bent, raising the question of the shape of the Earth (he believed it round) and the question of how it remains stationary in space, and also the interesting question of how far a rock would fall if a hole were drilled through the Earth and a rock dropped through it, see center of gravity. Campanus of Novara probably had access to Adelard's translation of Elements, and it is Campanus' edition that was first published in Venice in 1482 after the invention of the printing press.  It became the chief textbook of the mathematical schools of Western Europe until the 16th century.  See also  Latin translations of the 12th century   Notes  Bibliography  Burnett, Charles, ed. and trans. (1999). Adelard of Bath, Conversations with His Nephew: On the Same and the Different, Questions on Natural Science and On Birds.  With the collaboration of Italo Ronca, Pedro Mantas España, and Baudouin Van den Abeele. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  ISBN 0-521-39471-6   Gracia, Jorge J. E. and Timothy B. Noone (eds.). A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003). Hackett, Jeremiah. (2002). Adelard of Bath, A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages. eds. Jorge J. E. Garcia, Timothy B. Noone. vol. 24. Germany: Blackwell Publishing. pp. 86, 87.  ISBN 0-631-21672-3 Halsall, Paul. (1998). Laws of Henry I: The Murder Fine, The Medieval Sourcebook. Fordham University. Available at:   James.  (2009).  God's Philosophers:  How the Medieval World Laid the Foundations of Modern Science.  London:  Icon Books. Haskins, Charles H. (1911). Adelard of Bath, The English Historical Review, vol. 26, no. 103, Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 491–498. Available at:   Charles H. (1913). Adelard of Bath and Henry Plantagenet, The English Historical Review, vol. 28, no. 111, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Pp. 515, 516. Kraye, Jill, and W. F. Ryan, eds. Adelard of Bath. London: Warburg Institute, 1987. Print. Poole, Reginald L. (1912). The Exchequer in the Twelfth Century, Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. 49–53. ISBN 1-58477-658-7 Witherbee, Amy. "Adelard of Bath." MasterFILE Premier. Great Neck Publishing, 2007. Web. 20 Mar. 2012. Adelard of Bath.   External links  ADELHARD   Adelhard (Adelard) of  Bath – Give and take reason Adelard of Bath  Adelard Project at the Bath Royal Literary and Scientific Institution Extract from Abelard's "Very Difficult Natural Questions" about his relationship with Heloise.
Adele Goldberg Adele Goldberg is the name of:  Adele Goldberg (computer scientist) (born 1945), computer scientist who wrote or co-wrote books on the programming language Smalltalk-80 Adele Goldberg (linguist) (born 1963), researcher in the field of linguistics
Adi Shamir   Adi Shamir ( ; born July 6, 1952) is an Israeli cryptographer. He is a co-inventor of the RSA algorithm (along with Ron Rivest and Len Adleman), a co-inventor of the Feige–Fiat–Shamir identification scheme (along with Uriel Feige and Amos Fiat), one of the inventors of differential cryptanalysis and has made numerous contributions to the fields of cryptography and computer science. EducationBorn in Tel Aviv, Shamir received a BSc degree in mathematics from Tel Aviv University in 1973 and obtained his MSc and PhD degrees in Computer Science from the Weizmann Institute in 1975 and 1977 respectively. His thesis was titled, "Fixed Points of Recursive Programs and their Relation in Differential Agard Calculus". After a year postdoc at University of Warwick, he did research at MIT from 1977–1980 before returning to be a member of the faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science at the Weizmann Institute. Starting from 2006, he is also an invited professor at École Normale Supérieure in Paris. ResearchIn addition to RSA, Shamir's other numerous inventions and contributions to cryptography include the Shamir secret sharing scheme, the breaking of the Merkle-Hellman knapsack cryptosystem, visual cryptography, and the TWIRL and TWINKLE factoring devices. Together with Eli Biham, he discovered differential cryptanalysis, a general method for attacking block ciphers. (It later emerged that differential cryptanalysis was already known — and kept a secret — by both IBM   (subscription required)  and the NSA.   )Shamir has also made contributions to computer science outside of cryptography, such as finding the first linear time algorithm for 2-satisfiability  .  and showing the equivalence of the complexity classes PSPACE and IP. AwardsShamir has received a number of awards, including the following:  the 2002 ACM Turing Award, together with Rivest and Adleman, in recognition of his contributions to cryptography  the Paris Kanellakis Theory and Practice Award;  the Erdős Prize of the Israel Mathematical Society, the 1986 IEEE W.R.G. Baker Award  the UAP Scientific Prize; The Vatican's PIUS XI Gold Medal; the 2000 IEEE Koji Kobayashi Computers and Communications Award  the Israel Prize, in 2008, for computer sciences.   an honorary DMath (Doctor of Mathematics) degree from the University of Waterloo    See also   List of Israel Prize recipients NDS Group   References  External links   List of Adi Shamir's publications on DBLP Adi Shamir's US Patents, 1976-present
Adlai Stevenson I    Adlai Ewing Stevenson I (October 23, 1835 – June 14, 1914) served as the 23rd Vice President of the United States.  After being a Congressman from Illinois, he was appointed Assistant Postmaster General of the United States during Grover Cleveland's first administration (1885–1889), when he fired many Republican postal workers and replaced them with Southern Democrats. This earned him the enmity of the Republican-controlled Congress, but made him a favorite as Grover Cleveland's running mate in 1892, and he duly became 23rd Vice President of the United States. In office, he supported the free-silver lobby against the gold-standard men like Cleveland, but was praised for ruling in a dignified, non-partisan manner.In 1900, he ran for Vice President with William Jennings Bryan.    Although unsuccessful, he was the first ex-Vice President ever to win re-nomination for that post with a different Presidential candidate.  Early lifeStevenson's parents, John Turner Stevenson and Eliza Ewing Stevenson, were Wesleyans of Scots-Irish descent. John Turner Stevenson's grandfather, William was born in Roxburgh, Scotland then migrated to and from Ulster around 1748, settling first in Pennsylvania and then in North Carolina in the County of Iredell. The family moved to Kentucky in 1813.  Stevenson was born on the family farm in Christian County, Kentucky.  He attended the common school in Blue Water, Kentucky.  In 1852, when he was 16, frost killed the family's tobacco crop. His father set free their few slaves and the family moved to Bloomington, Illinois, where his father then operated a sawmill. Stevenson attended Illinois Wesleyan University at Bloomington and ultimately graduated from Centre College, in Danville, Kentucky; at the latter he was a part of Phi Delta Theta.  His father's death prompted Adlai to return from Kentucky to Illinois to run the sawmill.Stevenson was admitted to the bar in 1858, at age 23, and commenced practice in Metamora, in Woodford County, Illinois.  As a young lawyer, Stevenson encountered such celebrated Illinois attorneys as Stephen A. Douglas and Abraham Lincoln, campaigning for Douglas in his 1858 Senate race against Lincoln. Stevenson's dislike of Lincoln might have been prompted by a contentious meeting between the two, where Lincoln made several witty quips disparaging Stevenson.  Stevenson also made speeches against the "Know-Nothing" movement, a nativist group opposed to immigrants and Catholics. That stand helped cement his support in Illinois' large German and Irish communities. In a predominantly Republican area, the Democratic Stevenson won friends through his storytelling and his warm and engaging personality. Marriage and political life, 1860-1884Stevenson was appointed master in chancery (an aide in a court of equity), his first public office, which he held during the Civil War.  In 1864 Stevenson was a presidential elector for the Democratic ticket; he was also elected district attorney.In 1866 he married Letitia Green, with whom he had fallen in love nine years earlier, at Centre College (her father, the Reverend Lewis Warner Green, the head of the college, had not agreed to the marriage, but he had died, and Letitia and her mother - who also opposed the marriage - had subsequently moved to Bloomington). They had three daughters and a son, Lewis G. Stevenson.  Letitia helped establish the Daughters of the American Revolution as a way of healing the divisions between the North and South after the Civil War, and succeeded the wife of Benjamin Harrison as the DAR's second president-general.In 1868, at the end of his term as district attorney, he entered law practice with his cousin, James S. Ewing, moving with his wife back to Bloomington, settling in a large house on Franklin Square.  Stevenson & Ewing would become one of the state's most prominent law firms.  Ewing would later became the U.S. ambassador to Belgium.In 1874, Stevenson was elected as a Democrat to the Forty-fourth Congress, serving from March 4, 1875 to March 4, 1877. Local Republican newspapers painted him as a "vile secessionist," but the continuing hardships from the Panic of 1873 caused voters to sweep him into office with the first Democratic congressional majority since the Civil War.In 1876, Stevenson was an unsuccessful candidate for reelection. The Republican presidential ticket, headed by Rutherford B. Hayes carried his district, and Stevenson was narrowly defeated, getting 49.6 percent of the vote. In 1878, he ran on both the Democratic and Greenback tickets and won, returning to a House from which one-third of his earlier colleagues had either voluntarily retired or been removed by the voters. In 1880, again a presidential election year, he once more lost narrowly, and he lost again in 1882 in his final race for Congress. Election of Grover Cleveland in 1884 and the U.S. Post OfficeStevenson served as first assistant postmaster general under Grover Cleveland in 1885. During that time he fired over 40,000 Republican workers and replaced them with Democrats from the South. The Republican-controlled U.S. Congress did not forget this: when Stevenson was nominated for a federal judgeship, he was defeated for confirmation by the same people who never forgot his 1885 purge. Vice President, 1893-1897In 1892, when the Democrats chose Cleveland once again as their standard bearer, they appeased party regulars by the nomination of Stevenson, "headsman of the post-office," for vice president. As a supporter of using greenbacks and free silver to inflate the currency and alleviate economic distress in the rural districts, Stevenson balanced the ticket headed by Cleveland, the hard-money, gold-standard supporter. The winning Cleveland-Stevenson ticket carried Illinois, although not Stevenson's home district.Civil service reformers held out hope for the second Cleveland administration but saw Vice President Stevenson as a symbol of the spoils system. He never hesitated to feed names of Democrats to the Post Office Department. Once he called at the US Treasury Department to protest against an appointment and was shown a letter he had written endorsing the candidate. Stevenson told the treasury officials not to pay attention to any of his written endorsements; if he really favored someone he would tell them personally.A habitual cigar-smoker, Cleveland developed cancer of the mouth that required immediate surgery in the summer of 1893. The president insisted that the surgery be kept secret to avoid another panic on Wall Street.  While on a yacht in New York harbor that summer, Cleveland had his entire upper jaw removed and replaced with an artificial device, an operation that left no outward scar. The cancer surgery remained secret for another quarter century. Cleveland's aides explained that he had merely had dental work. His vice president little realized how close he came to the presidency that summer.Adlai Stevenson enjoyed his role as vice president, presiding over the U.S. Senate, "the most august legislative assembly known to men." He won praise for ruling in a dignified, nonpartisan manner. In personal appearance he stood six feet tall and was "of fine personal bearing and uniformly courteous to all." Although he was often a guest at the White House, Stevenson admitted that he was less an adviser to the president than "the neighbor to his counsels." He credited the President with being "courteous at all times" but noted that "no guards were necessary to the preservation of his dignity. No one would have thought of undue familiarity." For his part, President Cleveland snorted that the Vice President had surrounded himself with a coterie of free-silver men dubbed the "Stevenson cabinet." The president even mused that the economy had gotten so bad and the Democratic party so divided that "the logical thing for me to do ... was to resign and hand the Executive branch to Mr. Stevenson," joking that he would try to get his friends jobs in Stevenson's new cabinet. Presidential campaigns of 1896 and 1900Stevenson was mentioned as a candidate to succeed Cleveland in 1896. Although he chaired the Illinois delegation to the Democratic National Convention, he gained little support. Stevenson, 60 years old, received a smattering of votes, but the convention was taken by storm by a thirty-six-year-old former representative from Nebraska, William Jennings Bryan, who delivered his fiery "Cross of Gold" speech in favor of a free silver plank in the platform. Not only did the Democrats repudiate Cleveland by embracing free silver, but they also nominated Bryan for president. Many Cleveland Democrats, including most Democratic newspapers, refused to support Bryan, but Vice President Stevenson loyally endorsed the ticket.After the 1896 election, Bryan remained the titular leader of the Democrats and frontrunner for the nomination in 1900. Much of the newspaper speculation about who would run as the party's vice-presidential candidate centered on Indiana Senator Benjamin Shively. When reporter Arthur Wallace Dunn interviewed Shively at the convention, the senator said he "did not want the glory of a defeat as a vice presidential candidate." Disappointed, Dunn said that he still had to file a story on the vice-presidential nomination, and then added: "I believe I'll write a piece about old Uncle Adlai." Shively responded  That's a good idea. Stevenson is just the man. There you have it. Uniting the old Cleveland element with the new Bryan Democracy. You've got enough for one story. But say, this is more than a joke. Stevenson is just the man. For the rest of the day, Dunn heard other favorable remarks about Stevenson, and by that night the former vice president was the leading contender, since no one else was "very anxious to be the tail of what they considered was a forlorn hope ticket." The Populists had already nominated the ticket of Bryan and Charles A. Towne, a pro-silver Republican from Minnesota, with the tacit understanding that Towne would step aside if the Democrats nominated someone else. Bryan preferred his good friend Towne, but Democrats wanted one of their own, and the regular element of the party felt comfortable with Stevenson. Towne withdrew and campaigned for Bryan and Stevenson. As a result, Stevenson, who had run with Cleveland in 1892, now ran in 1900 with Cleveland's opponent Bryan. Twenty-five years senior to Bryan, Stevenson added age and experience to the ticket. Nevertheless, their effort failed badly against the Republican ticket of McKinley and Roosevelt. (Stevenson's role in the race is perhaps more distinguished by his being the first Vice President to win nomination for that office with a different running mate, after having completed his first term. As of 2012, Republican Charles W. Fairbanks's failure to win a second VP term in 1916 is the only example since.) Final yearsAfter the 1900 election, Stevenson returned again to private practice in Illinois.  He made one last attempt at office in a race for governor of Illinois in 1908, at age 72, narrowly losing. In 1909 he was brought in by founder Jesse Grant Chapline to aid distance learning school La Salle Extension University. Staff report (March 2, 1909). Stevenson to Quit Law; Former Vice President Will Aid La Salle Extension University. New York Times  After that, he retired to Bloomington, where his Republican neighbors described him as "windy but amusing."  He died in Chicago on June 14, 1914. His body is interred in a family plot in Evergreen Cemetery, Bloomington, Illinois.Stevenson's son, Lewis G. Stevenson, was Illinois secretary of state (1914–1917). Stevenson's grandson Adlai Ewing Stevenson II was the Democratic candidate for President of the United States in 1952 and 1956 and Governor of Illinois. His great-grandson, Adlai Ewing Stevenson III, was a U.S. senator from Illinois from 1970 to 1981 and an unsuccessful candidate for Governor of Illinois in 1982 and 1986. LegacyIn 1962, Stevenson's alma mater, Centre College (who also gave Stevenson an honorary degree in 1893), built and named a residence hall after Stevenson - Stevenson House - as part of a new campus quadrangle. Stevenson House was renovated in 1995.   links  Quotes by Adlai Stevenson Official U.S. Senate biography Stevensons put stamp on history, www.pantagraph.com Adlai Ewing Stevenson
Adolf Frederick, King of Sweden    Adolf Frederick or Adolph Frederick ( ,   ; Gottorp, 14 May 1710 – Stockholm, 12 February 1771) was King of Sweden from 1751 until his death. He was the son of Christian August of Holstein-Gottorp, Prince of Eutin and Albertina Frederica of Baden-Durlach.The first King from the House of Holstein-Gottorp, Adolph Frederick was a weak monarch, instated as first in line of the throne following the parliamentary government's failure to reconquer the Baltic provinces in 1741–43. Asides from a few attempts to, supported with pro-absolutist factions among the nobility reclaim the absolute monarchy held by former predecessors he remained a mere constitutional figurehead until his death, by popular belief attributed to a heavy consumption of semlas. His reign saw an extended period of internal peace, although the finances stagnated following failed mercantilist doctrines pursued by the Hat administration ended only in the 1765–66 parliament, where the Cap opposition overtook the government and enacted reforms towards greater economic liberalism as well as a Freedom of Press Act almost unique at the time for its curtailing of all censorship, retaining punitive measures only for libeling the monarch or the Lutheran state church. Following his death, his son Gustav III seized power through violent means in a 1772 coup d'etat, reinstating absolute rule. The rule of the Riksdag was not to prevail again until after World War I, when universal and equal suffrage was also instated (although under Adolf Frederick a minor number of women have had the vote). AncestryHis father was Christian Augustus (1673—1726) duke and a younger prince of Schleswig-Holstein-Gottorp, prince-bishop of Lubeck, and administrator, during the Great Northern War, of the duchies of Holstein-Gottorp for his relative Charles Frederick. His mother was Albertina Frederica of Baden-Durlach.On his mother's side, Adolf Frederick descended from king Gustav I of Sweden and from Christina Magdalena, a sister of Charles X of Sweden. From both his parents he was descended from Holstein-Gottorp, a house with a number of medieval Scandinavian royal dynasties among its ancestors. Adolf Frederick was also a 13th-generation descendant of Erik V of Denmark; a 13th-generation descendant of Sophia of Denmark and Valdemar I of Sweden; and an 11th-generation descendant of Euphemia of Sweden, Duchess of Mecklenburg and her husband the duke Albrecht. ReignFrom 1727 to 1750 prince Adolf Frederick was prince-bishop of Lübeck (which meant the rulership of a fief around and including Eutin), and administrator of Holstein-Kiel during the minority of his nephew, Duke Charles Peter Ulrich, afterwards Peter III of Russia. In 1743 he was elected heir to the throne of Sweden by the Hat faction in order that they might obtain better conditions at the Peace of Turku from Empress Elizabeth of Russia, who had adopted his nephew as her heir. He succeeded as Adolf Fredrik on 25 March 1751.During his twenty-year reign Adolf Frederick was little more than a figurehead, the real power being lodged in the hands of the Parliament of Sweden, often distracted by party strife. Twice he endeavoured to free himself from the tutelage of the estates. The first occasion was in 1755 when, stimulated by his imperious consort Louisa Ulrika of Prussia (sister of Frederick the Great), he tried to regain a portion of the attenuated prerogative, and nearly lost his throne in consequence. On the second occasion, under the guidance of his eldest son, the crown prince Gustavus, afterwards Gustav III of Sweden, he succeeded in overthrowing the "Cap" senate, but was unable to make any use of his victory.His mother died a widow in Hamburg on 22 December 1755. She was a descendant of earlier royal dynasties of Sweden, granddaughter of Christina Magdalena of Palatinate, Charles X's sister. DeathThe king died on 12 February 1771 after having consumed a meal consisting of lobster, caviar, sauerkraut, kippers and champagne, which was topped off with 14 servings of his favourite dessert: semla served in a bowl of hot milk.  He is thus remembered by Swedish school children as "the king who ate himself to death." He was regarded, both during his time and in later times, as dependent on others, a weak ruler and lacking of any talents. But he was allegedly also a good husband, a caring father and a gentle master to his servants. His favourite pastime was to make snuff boxes, which he allegedly spent a great deal of time doing. His personal hospitality and friendliness were witnessed by many who deeply mourned him at his death.His portrait is included with the 16-sheet series of Princely Persons on Horseback by Johann Elias Ridinger. ChildrenBy his marriage to Princess Louisa Ulrika of Prussia (which took place on 18 August/29 August 1744 in Drottningholm), he had the following children:  (Stillborn) (Stockholm, 18 February 1745 – Stockholm, 18 February 1745) Gustav III (1746–1792) Charles XIII (1748–1818) Frederick Adolf (1750–1803) Sofia Albertina (1753–1829)   Ancestors    References     Herman Lindqvist, "Historien om Sverige, Nyttan och Nöjet" (In Swedish)   External links  Royal House of Sweden Ducal House of Holstein-Gottorp Royal House of Prussia
Adolphe Willette      Adolphe-Léon Willette (July 31, 1857– February 4, 1926) was a French painter, illustrator, caricaturist, and lithographer. Willette ran as an "anti-semitic" candidate in the 9th arrondisement of Paris for the September 1889 legislative elections. BiographyWillette was born in Châlons-sur-Marne. He studied for four years at the École des Beaux-Arts under Cabanel, training which gave him a unique position among the graphic humorists of France. Whether comedy or tragedy, dainty triviality or political satire, his work is instinct with the profound sincerity of the artist. He set Pierrot upon a lofty pedestal among the imaginary heroes of France, and established Mimi Pinson, frail, lovable, and essentially good-hearted, in the affections of the nation.Willette is at once the modern Watteau of the pencil, and the exponent of sentiments that move the more emotional section of the public. Always a poet, and usually gay, fresh, and delicate, in his presentation of idylls exquisitely dainty and characteristically Gallic, illustrating the more "charming" side of love, often pure and sometimes extremely materialistic. Willette frequently reveals himself bitter and fierce, even ferocious, in his hatreds, being a violent though at the same time a generous partisan of political ideas, furiously compassionate with love and pity for the people whether they be ground down under the heel of political oppression, or are merely the victims ot unrequited love, suffering all the pangs of graceful anguish that are born of scornful treatment. There is charm even in his thrilling apotheosis of the guillotine, and in the introduction into his caricatures of the figure of Death itself.   The artist was a prolific contributor to the French illustrated press under the pseudonyms "Cemoi", "Pierrot", "Louison", "Bebe", and "Nox", but more often under his own name. He illustrated Melandri's Les Pierrots and Les Giboulles d'avril, and has published his own Pauvre Pierrot and other works, in which he tells his stories in scenes in the manner of Busch. He decorated several "brasseries artistiques" with wall-paintings, stained glass, &c., notably Le Chat noir and La Palette d'or, and he painted the highly imaginative ceiling for La Cigale music hall. His characteristically fantastic Parce Domine was shown in the Franco-British Exhibition in 1908. A remarkable collection of his works was exhibited in 1888. His V'almy is in the Luxembourg, Paris. References      External links     Www.lerire.com  at www.lerire.com Www.assietteaubeurre.com  at www.assietteaubeurre.com
Agaja   Agaja (sometimes spelled Agadja; also known as Trudo Agaja or Trudo Audati) was a King of Dahomey of the Kingdom of Dahomey, in present day Benin and ruled from 1718 to 1740.  He followed his brother, Akaba of Dahomey, who had ruled from 1685 until 1716.      During his reign, Dahomey expanded significantly and took control of key trade routes for the Atlantic slave trade.  Agaja's motivations and involvement in the slave trade remains an active dispute among Dahomey historians. HistoryOral histories say that Agaja was born the third child to Houegbadja who established most of the kingdom of Dahomey.  Houegbadja's first two children were twins named Akaba and Hangbe and Agaja was originally named Dosu, which is a traditional name for the first son born after twins.   Following Houegbadja's rule, Akaba became the king and significantly expanded the empire outside of the Abomey plateau with wars in the important Ouémé River valley.  However, the kingdom remained largely an inland kingdom without direct access to Atlantic trade routes.  Oral traditions say that Akaba died suddenly during battle and since his son Agbo Sassa was a minor, Akaba's twin sister Hangbe became the regent to the throne.   Oral histories disagree about the length of her reign, but they generally hold that Agaja attempted to gain control and Hangbe supported the claims of Agbo Sassa in 1718.  The council named Agaja the king after a brief struggle and Agbo Sassa went into exile.   As king, Agaja presided over the most important expansions of the Kingdom in the 1720s.  In 1724, Agaja provided military assistance in a succession struggle in the lucrative city of Allada; however, when an opportunity arose, he ended up occupying the city himself.     Agaja made Allada the new capital of the kingdom (after his death, Tegbessou moved the capital back to Abomey but appointed a puppet ruler in Allada).    Agaja then requested free movement for Dahomey traders from the coastal Kingdom of Whydah, (modern day Ouidah).  When this request was denied, Agaja attacked and quickly took over the Kingdom of Whydah leading to the displacement, slaughter, and enslavement of much of the population.   The royal family of Whydah relocated to the islands off the coast and prepared to take back the city if the opportunity arose.  In these three years, Agaja had more than doubled the territory of Dahomey, had secured access to the Atlantic coast, and had become a prominent power along the Slave Coast.     These victories brought Dahomey into conflict with the large Oyo Empire. Between 1726 and 1740 there was regular warfare between Dahomey and the Oyo Empire, which had significant superiority with its cavalry. During attacks by Oyo, Agaja and his army would move into the forests and marches and wait for the Oyo forces to withdraw.      Agaja agreed to terms of tribute in 1730, including providing both money and slaves, to the Oyo Empire in exchange for some autonomy and continued monopoly over the slave trade in Dahomey.   After the defeat by the Oyo Empire, the royal aristocracy of Whydah attacked and reconquered the city.  With depleted forces, Agaja created a special unit of women to be dressed in war armor and assemble at the back of his remaining army.  The ploy worked as the Whydah forces saw a huge force marching toward the city and fled before any fighting happened.     After this, in 1733, Agaja allowed inhabitants of Whydah to return.   With the key location and expanded trade prominence, Dahomey became an important role in the Atlantic slave trade under the rest of Agaja's reign.  Domestic tension and continued threats from the Oyo Empire were prominent parts of the last years of Agaja's reign.  This resulted in the lifting of a royal monopoly on the slave trade in 1737 to appease the Oyo Empire and an invasion of Dahomey by Oyo in 1739.  King Agaja died in 1740 and although he had named his second oldest son to be his heir, a younger son Tegbessou was preferred by other powerful members of Dahomey and so he became the new king. Agaja and the Slave TradeThe role of Agaja with the slave trade is an important debate between historians of Dahomey and the particular motives, actions, and policies with respect to Agaja and the slave trade are controversial.    Historian Akinjogbin argues that Agaja had a strong motivation to end the Atlantic slave trade and that his conquests of key coastal regions were a crucial aspect of this project.    Key evidence for this includes a letter dictated by Agaja to George I of Great Britain in 1726, whose authenticity is disputed.    In the letter, King Agaja proposes to allow favorable agricultural export terms to Great Britain and the availability of slave labor, as long as the slaves were not removed from Dahomey.   This letter became crucial in debates in Great Britain about the abolition of the Atlantic slave trade as the authorship of a purported indigenous African abolitionist. Law, in contrast, contends that Agaja was primarily concerned with direct access to firearms and trade with Europeans.  During his reign, he instituted a royal monopoly on the slave trade in the territory and taxed the trade heavily; however, he actively allowed the slave trade to occur in exchange primarily for guns and gunpowder.      Agaja created a structure for the slave trade and engaged in significant aspects of the slave trade. Legacy Agaja introduced many features of the Dahomey state that became prominent in later years.  One of the most notable was the use of female warriors as part of the personal palace guard and in some combat situations.  The Dahomey Amazons were a key aspect of his court, with armed women displayed prominently in the capital city of Abomey, however the Amazons were likely not fully organized during his reign.       These female warriors became a key dynastic tradition.  Under his administration, the administration began road building operations that would result in the famous Royal Road of Dahomey.  Other administrative offices, notably the Yovogan (or white man to negotiate the slave trade), were created during his administration and became key features of Dahomey political life.    As a result of opening Atlantic trade access for Dahomey, Agaja's symbol is a European caravel boat. See Also  History of the Kingdom of Dahomey Francisco Félix de Sousa   References
Agamedes In Greek mythology, Agamedes ( ) was a son of Erginus (or, according to some traditions, the son of Stymphalus and grandson of Arcas).   He was father of Cercyon by Epicaste, who also brought to him a stepson, Trophonius, who was by some believed to be a son of Apollo.  According to others, Agamedes was a son of Apollo and Epicaste, or of Zeus and Iocaste, and father of Trophonius.  In the most common accounts, Trophonius was his brother.   The two brothers are said to have distinguished themselves as architects, especially in building temples and palaces.  They built Apollo's temple housing the oracle of Delphi.    A tradition mentioned by Cicero states that Agamedes and Trophonius, after having built this temple, prayed to the god to grant them in reward for their labor what was best for men.   The oracle told the brothers to do whatsoever they wished for six days and, on the seventh, their greatest wish would be granted.  They did and were found dead on the seventh day.  The saying "those whom the gods love die young" comes from this story.They also built a treasury of Hyrieus, king of Hyria in Boeotia. The scholiast on Aristophanes gives a somewhat different account from Charax of Pergamum,  and makes them build the treasury for King Augeas.  The story about this treasury in Pausanias bears a great resemblance to that which Herodotus relates of the treasury of the Egyptian king Rhampsinitus.   In the construction of the treasury of Hyrieus, Agamedes and Trophonius contrived to place one stone in such a manner that it could be taken away outside, and thus formed an entrance to the treasury, without anybody perceiving it. Agamedes and Trophonius constantly robbed the treasury; and the king, seeing that locks and seals were uninjured while his treasures were constantly decreasing, set traps to catch the thief. Agamedes caught in one of these snares, and Trophonius cut off his head to keep Agamedes's identity secret. After this, Trophonius was immediately swallowed up by the earth.  On this spot there was afterwards, in the grove of Lebadeia, the so-called cave of Agamedes, with a column by the side of it. Here also was the oracle of Trophonius, and those who consulted it first offered a ram to Agamedes and invoked him. The question as to whether the story about the Egyptian treasury is derived from Greece, or whether the Greek story was an importation from Egypt, has been answered by modern scholars in both ways; but Müller has rendered it very probable that the tradition took its rise among the Minyans, was transferred from them to Augeas, and was known in Greece long before the reign of Psammetichus, during which the intercourse between the two countries was opened.  References  Sources
Agatharchides  Agatharchides (Ἀγαθαρχίδης or Agatharchus Ἀγάθαρχος) of Cnidus was a Greek historian and geographer (flourished 2nd century BC). LifeHe is believed to have been born at Cnidus, hence his appellation. As Stanley M. Burstein notes, the "evidence for Agatharchides' life is meagre." Photius describes him as a threptos, a kind of assistant of servile origin, to Cinnaeus and states that he was later a secretary to Heraclides Lembus. Cinnaeus served as a counselor to Ptolemy VI; Heraclides is best known for negotiating the treaty that ended Antiochus IV's invasion of Egypt in 169 BC. Agatharchides furnishes few clues about his own life. At the conclusion of his On the Erythraean Sea, he apologizes for being unable to complete his work "since our age is unable to similarly bear the toil" and "as a result of the disturbances in Egypt" he could no longer access the official records (a fragment cited by Photius in his Bibliotheca Cod. 250.110, 460b). There are two possible occasions when this could have happened: the first was in 145 BC, when Ptolemy VIII purged Alexandria of the intellectuals who supported his rivals for the throne; and in 132 BC after Ptolemy, who had been driven from his kingdom by a rebellion in Alexandria, returned and exacted reprisals on that city. While most scholars have favored the later date, Burstein argues for the earlier one.Extracts from the first book of his Erythraean Sea, written in the first person and advocating a military campaign into the lands south of Egypt, led early scholars to deduce that Agatharchides was an important political figure of his time, and served as a guardian to one of the sons of Ptolemy VIII. Dodwell endeavored to show that it the younger son, Alexander, and objects to Soter, that he reigned conjointly with his mother. This, however, was the case with Alexander likewise. Wesseling and Henry Fynes Clinton think the elder brother to be the one meant, for Soter was more likely to have been a minor on his accession in 117 BC than Alexander in 107 BC, ten years after their father's death; the second edition of the Oxford Classical Dictionary article on Agatharchides agrees that the son was Soter. Moreover Dodwell's date would leave too short an interval between the publication of Agatharchides's work on the Erythraean Sea (about 113 BC), and the work of Artemidorus. However at least as early as 1810, when B. G. Niebuhr pointed out that these excerpts were from a speech, and not part of the narrative of his book, this theory has been recognized as conflicting with other known historical facts. WritingsAgatharchides was not well known in ancient times. Of his two major works, Affairs in Asia (Ta kata ten Asian) in ten books, and Affairs in Europe (Ta kata ten Europen) in forty-nine books, only a few fragments survive, too few to provide us with any sense of the contents of either work. However, for his On the Erythraean Sea (Peri tes Erythras thalasses) in five books, almost the entire fifth book, a geographical treatise on the Horn of Africa and the lands around the Red Sea, has survived almost intact. According to Burstein, "the comparative soberness of Agatharchides' treatment compared to previous accounts and the wealth of information contained in it led to a quick recognition . . . [that it was] a valuable summary of the results of Ptolemaic exploration." In the first book of On the Erythraean Sea was a discussion respecting the origin of the name. In the fifth he described the mode of life amongst the Sabaeans in Arabia, and the Ichthyophagi, or fish-eaters, the way in which elephants were caught by the elephant-eaters, and the mode of working the gold mines in the mountains of Egypt, near the Red Sea. His account of the Ichthyophagi and of the mode of working the gold mines, has been copied by Diodorus (iii.12-18). Amongst other extraordinary animals he mentions the camelopard, which was found in the country of the Troglodytae, and the rhinoceros.Material from this book is quoted directly or indirectly by Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Pliny the Elder, Aelian (Claudius Aelianus) and other authors. Although his work was superseded by more detailed accounts in the 2nd century AD, Photius found a copy of Erythraean Sea in the 10th century, from which he preserved extensive extracts in his Bibliotheca. Photius states that Agatharchides wrote in the Attic dialect, with a style that was dignified and perspicuous, and abounded in sententious passages—inspiring a favorable opinion from Photius. In the composition of his speeches Agatharchides was an imitator of Thucydides, whom he equalled in dignity and excelled in clearness. He was acquainted with the language of the Aethiopians (de Ruhr. M. p. 46), and appears to have been the first who discovered the true cause of the yearly inundations of the Nile. (Diod. i. 41.)An Agatharchides, of Samos, is mentioned by Plutarch, as the author of a work on Persia, and one περὶ λίθων. J.A. Fabricius, however, conjectures that the true reading is Agathyrsides, not Agatharchides. (Dodwell in Hudson's Geogr. Script. Gr. Minores; Clinton, Fasti Hell. iii, p. 535.) HonourThe crater Agatharchides on the Moon is named in his honour. Bibliography  Stanley M. Burstein, translator and editor. Works Issued by the Hakluyt Society: Agatharchides of Cnidus, On the Erythraean Sea. Second series, no. 172. London: Hakluyt Society, 1989.
Agoli-agbo   Agoli-agbo is considered to have been the twelfth and final King of Dahomey.  He took the throne after the previous king, Behanzin, went into exile after a failed war with France.  He was in power from 1894 to 1900.The exile of Behanzin did not legalize the French colonization. The French general Alfred Dodds offered the throne to every one of the immediate royal family, in return for a signature on a treaty establishing a French protectorate over the Kingdom; all refused. Finally, Behanzin's Army Chief of Staff Prince Agoli-agbo, brother of Behanzin and son of King Glélé. He was appointed to the throne, as a 'traditional chief' rather than head of state of a sovereign nation, by the French when he agreed to sign the instrument of surrender. He 'reigned' for only six years, assisted by a French Viceroy. The French prepared for direct administration, which they achieved on February 12, 1900. Agoli-agbo went into exile in Gabon. In 1910, he was allowed to return and to live in the Save-Region. He occasionally returned to Abomey in order to perform ancestor worship for the departed kings. Agoli-agbo's symbols are a leg kicking a rock, a bow (a symbol of the return to traditional weapons under the new rules established by the colonial administrators), and a broom.
Agonglo   Agonglo was the eighth King of Dahomey.  He succeeded his father, Kpengla, and ruled from 1789 to 1797. Agonglo made several reforms which pleased his subjects: taxes were lowered, and a greater distribution of gifts was made during the annual customs. He reformed the shape of the asen, bringing the innovation of having the offering surface supported by ribs rather than a metal cone, typical of the earlier Allada style altars. After the period of aggressive military expansion of his father, Agonglo consolidated the rule of the dynasty. Despite this, he was successful in the few battles he engaged in and his kingdom grew. His symbol is the pineapple. Agonglo is also notable in being the first of the Dahomean kings to marry a European—one of his wives was Sophie, a Dutch metisse.Agonglo was succeeded by his eldest son, Adandozan. References
Ahmed Yassin     Sheikh Ahmed Ismail Hassan Yassin (1937 – 22 March 2004)    (   ) was a founder of Hamas, an Islamist Palestinian paramilitary organization and political party.      Yassin also served as the spiritual leader of the organization. Hamas gained popularity in Palestinian society by establishing hospitals, education systems, libraries and other services,  but it has also claimed responsibility for a number of suicide attacks targeting Israeli civilians, leading to its being characterized by the European Union,  Israel,  Japan,    Canada,  and the United States "Country reports on terrorism 2005", United States Department of State. Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism. US Dept. of State Publication 11324. April 2006. p 196   as a terrorist organization.      Also:  Banned in Jordan--Karmi, Omar. "What does the Hamas victory mean for nearby Jordan?", The Daily Star, 2006-2-18 Australia lists the militant wing of Hamas, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, as a terrorist organization--Listing of Terrorist Organisations, Australian Government Attorney-General's Department, 27 January 2006. Retrieved 2006-7-31. United Kingdom lists the militant wing of Hamas, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, as a terrorist organization--United Kingdom Home Security Office. Terrorism Act 2000. Proscribed terrorist groups   Yassin, a quadriplegic who was nearly blind, had used a wheelchair since a sporting accident at the age of 12.    He was assassinated when an Israeli helicopter gunship fired a missile at him as he was being wheeled from early morning prayers.    His killing, in an attack that claimed the lives of both his bodyguards and nine bystanders, precipitated both criticism and praise of Israel, and many observers suggested that the act would negatively impact the peace process.  200,000 Palestinians attended his funeral procession. Prusher, Ilene R. Killing of Yassin a Turning Point. The Christian Science Monitor. 23 March 2004.  Early lifeAhmed Yassin was born in al-Jura, a small village near the city of Ashkelon, during the British Mandate of Palestine. His date of birth is not known for certain: according to his Palestinian passport, he was born on 1 January 1929, but he claimed to have actually been born in 1938. His father, Abdullah Yassin, died when he was three years old. Afterward, he became known in his neighborhood as Ahmad Sa'ada after his mother Sa'ada al-Habeel. This was to differentiate him from the children of his father's other three wives. Together, Yassin had four brothers and two sisters. He and his entire family fled to Gaza, settling in al-Shati Camp after his village was captured by the Israel Defence Forces during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.  Yassin came to Gaza as a refugee. When he was 12, he sustained a severe spinal injury while wrestling his friend Abdullah al-Khatib. His neck was kept in plaster for 45 days. The damage to his spinal cord rendered him a quadraplegic for the rest of his life. Fearing a rift between his family and al-Khatib's, Yassin initially told his family that he sustained his injuries while playing leapfrog during a sports lesson with his school friends on the beach. Chehab, 2007, p.16. Although Yassin applied and attended Al-Azhar University in Cairo, he was unable to pursue his studies there due to his deteriorating health. He was forced to be educated at home where he read widely, particularly on philosophical matters and on religion, politics, sociology, and economics. His followers believe that his worldly knowledge made him "one of the best speakers in the Gaza Strip." During this time, he began delivering weekly sermons after Friday prayers, drawing large crowds of people. After years of unemployment, he got a post as an Arabic language teacher at an elementary school in Rimal, Gaza. Headmaster Mohammad al-Shawa initially had reservations about Yassin, concerning the reception he would receive from the pupils due to his disability. However, according to al-Shawa, Yassin handled them well and his popularity grew, especially among the more scholarly children. His teaching methods reportedly provoked mixed reactions among parents because he encouraged his students to attend the mosque an additional two times a week.  Having a regular job gave Yassin financial stability, and he married one of his relatives Halima Yassin in 1960 at the age of 22.  The couple had eleven children. Involvement in the Israel-Palestinian conflictYassin subsequently became involved with a Palestinian branch of the Muslim Brotherhood. In 1984 he and others were jailed for secretly stockpiling weapons, but in 1985 he was released as part of the Jibril Agreement.    In 1987, during the First Intifada, Yassin co-founded Hamas with Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi, originally calling it the "paramilitary wing" of the Palestinian Muslim Brotherhood, and becoming its spiritual leader. Yassin opposed the peace process between the Palestinians and the Israelis. He supported armed resistance against Israel, and was very outspoken in his views. He asserted that Palestine is an Islamic land "consecrated for future Muslim generations until Judgment Day" and that no Arab leader had the right to give up any part of this territory.   Yassin's rhetoric did not distinguish between Israelis and Jews, at one point stating that "Reconciliation with the Jews is a crime."  as quoted in    Yassin's inflammatory rhetoric was often scrutinized in the news media. Poole, Elizabeth and Richardson, John E. Muslims and the News Media. 2006, page 112.  On one occasion, he opined that Israel "must disappear from the map".  Yassin's declaration that "We chose this road, and will end with martyrdom or victory" later became an oft repeated mantra among Palestinians.    In 1989, Yassin was arrested by the Israelis and sentenced to life imprisonment. In 1997 Yassin was released from Israeli prison as part of an arrangement with Jordan following the failed assassination attempt of Khaled Mashal, which had been conducted by the Israeli Mossad in Jordan. Yassin was released by Israel in exchange for two Mossad agents who had been arrested by Jordanian authorities, on the condition that he refrain from continuing to call for suicide bombings against Israel.     Following his release, Yassin resumed his leadership of Hamas. He immediately resumed his calls for attacks on Israel, using tactics including suicide bombings, thus violating the condition of his release.  He also sought to maintain relations with the Palestinian Authority, believing that a clash between the two groups would be harmful to the interests of the Palestinian people.  Yassin, however, was repeatedly placed under house arrest by the Authority. Each time he was eventually released, often after extended demonstrations by his supporters. Yassin criticized the outcome of the 2003 Aqaba summit. His group initially declared a temporary truce with Israel. However, in July 2003, the truce unravelled after a Palestinian suicide bombing of a Jerusalem bus left 21 people dead. Israeli forces killed two Hamas members in retaliation. On 6 September 2003, an Israeli Air Force (IAF) F-16 fired several missiles on a building in Gaza City, the Gaza Strip.  Yassin was in the building at the time but survived.  Israeli officials later confirmed that Yassin was the target of the attack. His injuries were treated at Shifa Hospital in Gaza City. Yassin responded to the media that "Days will prove that the assassination policy will not finish the Hamas. Hamas leaders wish to be martyrs and are not scared of death.  Jihad will continue and the resistance will continue until we have victory, or we will be martyrs."   Yassin further promised that Hamas would teach Israel an "unforgettable lesson" as a result of the assassination attempt.    Yassin made no attempt to guard himself from further attempts on his life or hide his location.  Journalists sometimes visited his Gaza address and Yassin maintained a routine daily pattern of activity, including being wheeled every morning to a nearby mosque.Reem Raiyshi's suicide bombing at the Erez crossing on 14 January 2004, which killed four civilians, was believed by the Israeli military to have been directly ordered by Yassin.     Yassin suggested that the suicide bomber was fulfilling her "obligation" to make jihad,  and Israel's Deputy Defence Minister responded by publicly declaring that Yassin was "marked for death."  Yassin denied having any involvement in the attack's planning.  Involvement in terrorist attacks  Yassin was a founder and prominent leader of Hamas, which is regarded as a terrorist organization by a number of national governments.  Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon characterized Yassin as "the "mastermind of Palestinian terror" and a "mass murderer."  The Israeli government repeatedly asserted that Yassin was responsible for a number of terrorist attacks, which targeted and killed a number of civilians.  They accused him of being behind all the attacks perpetrated by Hamas against Israel. Israel said the targeted killing was in response to dozens of suicide attacks by Hamas against Israeli civilians.  According to an Israeli government website:  Yassin was the dominant authority of the Hamas leadership, which was directly involved in planning, orchestrating and launching terror attacks carried out by the organization. In this capacity, Yassin personally gave his approval for the launching of Qassam rockets against Israeli cities, as well as for the numerous Hamas terrorist bombings and suicide operations. In his public appearances and interviews, Yassin called repeatedly for a continuation of the 'armed struggle' against Israel, and for an intensification of the terrorist campaign against its citizens. The successful operation against Yassin constitutes a significant blow to a central pillar of the Hamas terrorist organization, and a major setback to its terrorist infrastructure.  In his statement Yassin declared that Hamas did target Israeli civilians, only in direct retaliation for the death of Palestinian civilians. In his thinking this was a necessary tactic to “show the Israelis they could not get away without a price for killing our people.”  AssassinationAhmed Yassin was killed in an Israeli attack on 22 March 2004. While he was being wheeled out of an early morning prayer session in Gaza city,    an Israeli AH-64 Apache helicopter gunship fired Hellfire missiles at Yassin and both of his bodyguards. Before the attack, Israeli F-16 jets fly overhead to obscure noise of approaching helicopters.  Yassin always used the same direction every morning to go to the same mosque in the Sabra district that is 100m from his home.  Yassin and his bodyguards were killed instantly, along with nine bystanders.     Another 12 people were injured in the operation, including two of Yassin's sons. Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi, Yassin's Deputy, became the Hamas Leader after his assassination. The reason for the assassination is that Yassin was a strategic, rather than a security, threat to Israel.  Reaction to assassinationKofi Annan, UN Secretary General, condemned the killing.     The UN Commission on Human Rights passed a resolution condemning the killing    supported by votes from 31 countries including the People's Republic of China, India, Indonesia, Russia, and South Africa with 2 votes against and 18 abstentions. The Arab League council also expressed condemnation,    as did the African Union.    A draft resolution condemning the extrajudicial execution of Yassin and six other Palestinians, as well as all terrorist attacks against civilians    was brought before the United Nations Security Council and vetoed by the United States, with United Kingdom, Germany, and Romania abstaining.   The United States explained that the draft resolution should have condemned Hamas explicitly following its sponsored suicide bombings in Ashdod the week before.  PalestinianThe Palestinian Authority declared three days of mourning and closed Palestinian schools. Hamas official Ismail Haniyeh suggested, "This is the moment Sheikh Yassin dreamed about". The Hamas leadership said Ariel Sharon had "opened the gates of hell."  Hamas called for retaliation against Israel. About 200,000 people took to the streets of the Gaza Strip for Yassin's funeral as Israeli forces declared a national alert. The assassination of Yassin also led to the fact that Hamas, for the ﬁrst time, named as the most popular movement in Palestine by the residents of the West Bank and Gaza Strip two weeks after the assassination.    Abdel Aziz Rantisi was announced as the new head of Hamas. At a memorial service for Sheik Yassin, he declared that "The Israelis will not know security... We will fight them until the liberation of Palestine, the whole of Palestine."    Publicly addressing the "military wing" of Hamas, Rantisi suggested, "The door is open for you to strike all places, all the time and using all means."  Rantisi was himself killed by Israel on 17 April 2004 in an assassination almost identical to Yassin's.On 31 August 2004, at least 15 Israeli people were killed and 80 injured in a suicide attack against two Israeli buses in Beersheba. Hamas stated the attack was a revenge for the assassination of Rantissi and Yassi.  Following the bombing, an estimated 20,000 Hamas supporters in Gaza took to Gaza's streets, celebrating the successful attack. Palestinians celebrate deadly Israeli bus bombings. Reuters.  IsraeliShaul Mofaz, the Israeli Defense Minister, branded Yassin "the Palestinian Bin Laden" and said, "If we have to balance how many more terrorists Yassin would have sent, how many terror attacks he would have approved, if we weigh this on the scales, we acted rightly". Avraham Poraz, Israel's Interior Minister and member of the centrist Shinui Party, said he believed the assassination of Yassin "was a bad idea because I am afraid of a revenge coming from the Palestinian side, from the Hamas side." Israel defiant over Yassin killing. BBC News. Monday, 22 March 2004  Shimon Peres, then leader of the Labour opposition, was critical of the assassination, suggesting that it "could lead to an escalation of terror."  Arab worldKing Abdullah II of Jordan described the assassination as a "crime";  Lebanon's president Emile Lahud vehemently denounced the Israeli act as "...a crime [which] will not succeed in liquidating the Palestinian cause";  Emir of Kuwait Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah said: "Violence will increase now because violence always breeds violence";  the head of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, Mohammed Akef, described Yassin as a "martyr" and his assassination a "cowardly operation."  WesternJack Straw, then British Foreign Secretary, said: "All of us understand Israel's need to protect itself – and it is fully entitled to do that – against the terrorism which affects it, within international law. But it is not entitled to go in for this kind of unlawful killing and we condemn it. It is unacceptable, it is unjustified and it is very unlikely to achieve its objectives." In response to a question about the killing, U.S. President George W. Bush responded, As far as the Middle East, it's a troubled region, and the attacks were troubling. There needs to be a focused, concerted effort by all parties to fight terror. Any country has a right to defend itself from terror. Israel has the right to defend herself from terror. And as she does so, I hope she keeps consequences in mind as to how to make sure we stay on the path to peace.  United States Representative to the United Nations John Negroponte stated that the USA was "deeply troubled by this action by the Government of Israel", while asserting that the U.S. would not support any U.N. Security Council statement condemning Israel's assassination of Yassin that did not include a condemnation of "Hamas terrorist attacks".  According to his statement to the UN Security Council,  See also  Hamas Abdel Aziz al-Rantissi Muslim Brotherhood List of Israeli civilian casualties in the Second Intifada   Notes and references  External links  Reports on death "IDF strike kills Hamas leader Ahmed Yassin" (Israeli MFA) "Sharon was after the Yassin's murder" "Assassination of Sheik Yasin Opened Pandora's box" Interactive Guide: Sheikh Yassin assassination – The Guardian Profiles of Yassin BBC Obituary Guardian Obituary    UN Response U.S. Vetoes U.N. Resolution Condemning Israel for Hamas Killing
Airey Neave     Airey Middleton Sheffield Neave, DSO, OBE, MC (23 January 1916 – 30 March 1979) was a British soldier, barrister and politician.During World War II, Neave was one of the few servicemen to escape from the German prisoner-of-war camp Oflag IV-C at Colditz Castle. He later became Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) for Abingdon.Neave was assassinated in 1979 in a car-bomb attack at the House of Commons. The Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) claimed responsibility. Early lifeNeave was the son of Sheffield Airey Neave (1879–1961), a well-known entomologist, and his wife Dorothy (d. 1943), the daughter of Arthur Thomson Middleton. His father was the grandson of Sheffield Neave, the third son of Sir Thomas Neave, 2nd Baronet (see Neave Baronets). Neave spent his early years in Knightsbridge in London, before he moved to Beaconsfield. Neave was sent to St. Ronan's School, Worthing, and from there, in 1929, he went to Eton College. He went on to study jurisprudence at Merton College, Oxford. While at Eton, Neave composed a prize-winning essay in 1933 that examined the likely consequences of Adolf Hitler's rise to supreme power in Germany, and Neave predicted then that another widespread war would break out in Europe in the near future. Neave had earlier been on a visit to Germany, and he witnessed the Nazi German methods of grasping political and military power in their hands. When Neave went to Oxford University, he purchased and read the entire written  works of the prescient writer Carl von Clausewitz. When Neave was asked why, he answered: "since war [is] coming, it [is] only sensible to learn as much as possible about the art of waging it".  During 1938, Neave completed his third-class degree in the study of jurisprudence. By his own admission, while at Oxford University, Neave did only the minimal amount of academic work that was required of him by his tutors. Wartime serviceNeave joined the Territorial Army and became an officer of the Royal Artillery in the regular British Army at the beginning of World War II. He was sent to France in February 1940 as part of a searchlight regiment. He was wounded and captured by the Germans at Calais on 23 May 1940. He was imprisoned at Oflag IX-A/H near Spangenberg and in February 1941 moved to Stalag XX-A near Thorn in German-occupied western Poland. In April 1941 he escaped from Thorn with Norman Forbes. They were captured near Itow while trying to enter Soviet-controlled Poland and were briefly in the hands of the Gestapo.  In May, they were both sent to Oflag IV-C (often referred to as Colditz Castle because of its location). - The Story Of Colditz Neave made his first attempt to escape from Colditz on 28 August 1941 disguised as a German N.C.O.  He did not get out of the castle as his hastily contrived German uniform (made from a Polish army tunic and cap painted with scenery paint) was rendered bright green under the prison searchlights. Airey Neave, They Have Their Exits (Beagle Books, Inc., 1971) p.69-76.   He tried again on 5 January 1942, again in disguise, together with Dutch officer Anthony Luteyn. Better uniforms and escape route (they made a quick exit from a theatrical production using the trap door beneath the stage) got them out of the prison and by train and on foot they travelled via Leipzig, Ulm, and then into Switzerland via Hans Larive's Singen route by 9 January 1942.    Neave returned to Britain through France, Spain, and Gibraltar and was the first British officer to make a "home run" from Colditz.   He was later recruited as an intelligence agent for MI9. While at MI9, he was the immediate superior of Michael Bentine. He also served with the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg, investigating Krupp. As a well-known war hero - as well as a qualified lawyer who spoke fluent German - he was honoured with the role of reading the indictments to the Nazi leaders on trial. He wrote several books about his war experiences including an account of the Nuremberg Trial. Airey Neave, Nuremberg  Political careerNeave stood at the 1950 election in Thurrock and at Ealing North in 1951. He was elected for Abingdon in a by-election in June 1953, but his career was held back by a heart attack he suffered in 1959. Airey Neave was a Governor of Imperial College between 1963 and 1971 and was a member of the House of Commons select committee on Science and Technology between 1965 and 1970.Edward Heath, when Chief Whip, was alleged to have told Neave that after he suffered his heart attack his career was finished  but in his 1998 autobiography, Heath strongly denied ever making such a remark. He admitted that in December 1974 Neave had told him to stand down for the good of the party. During the final two months of 1974, Neave had asked Keith Joseph, William Whitelaw and Edward du Cann to stand against Heath, and said that in the case of any of them challenging for the party leadership, he would be their campaign manager. When all three refused to stand, Neave agreed to be the campaign manager for Margaret Thatcher's attempt to become leader of the Conservative Party, that was eventually victorious. When Thatcher was elected leader in February 1975, he was rewarded with the post of head of her private office. He was then appointed Shadow Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and was poised to attain the equivalent Cabinet position at the time of his death. In opposition, Neave was a strong supporter of Roy Mason, who took a hard line against both Loyalist and Republican paramilitaries.Neave was author of the new and radical Conservative policy of abandoning devolution if there was no early progress in that regard and concentrating on local government reform instead. This integrationist policy was hastily abandoned by Humphrey Atkins, who became Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, the role Neave had shadowed.Politician Tony Benn records in his diary (17 February 1981) that a journalist from the New Statesman, Duncan Campbell, told him that he had received information from an intelligence agent two years previously that Neave had planned to have Benn assassinated if a Labour Government was elected, James Callaghan resigned and there was a possibility that Benn might be elected Party Leader in his place. Campbell claimed that the agent was ready to give his name and the New Statesman was going to print the story. Benn, however, discounted the validity of the story and wrote in his diary: "No one will believe for a moment that Airey Neave would have done such a thing".  However the magazine printed the story on 20 February 1981, naming the agent as Lee Tracey. Mr. Tracey claimed to have met Neave and was asked to join a team of intelligence and security specialists which would "make sure Benn was stopped". Tracey planned a second meeting with Neave but Neave was killed before they could meet again.  Death Airey Neave was killed on 30 March 1979, when a magnetic car bomb fitted with a ball bearing tilt switch exploded under his Vauxhall Cavalier  at 2:58 p.m. as he drove out of the Palace of Westminster car park. Car bomb kills Airey Neave  Both of his legs were blown off and he died in hospital an hour after being freed from the wreckage. The Irish National Liberation Army (INLA), an Irish Republican organisation banned in the United Kingdom under anti-terrorism legislation, admitted responsibility for the killing.Conservative leader Margaret Thatcher led tributes to Neave saying: "He was one of freedom's warriors. No one knew of the great man he was, except those nearest to him. He was staunch, brave, true, strong; but he was very gentle and kind and loyal. It's a rare combination of qualities. There's no one else who can quite fill them. I, and so many other people, owe so much to him and now we must carry on for the things he fought for and not let the people who got him triumph." Labour Prime Minister James Callaghan said: "No effort will be spared to bring the murderers to justice and to rid the United Kingdom of the scourge of terrorism."  The INLA issued a statement regarding the killing in the August 1979 edition of The Starry Plough.   Neave's death came just two days after the vote of no confidence which brought down James Callaghan's government and a few weeks before the 1979 general election which brought about a Conservative party victory and Margaret Thatcher came to power as Prime Minister. Neave's wife Diana, whom he married on 29 December 1942, was subsequently elevated to the House of Lords as Baroness Airey of Abingdon.Neave's biographer Paul Routledge met a member of the Irish Republican Socialist Party (the political wing of INLA) who was involved in the killing of Neave and who told Routledge that Neave "would have been very successful at that job [Northern Ireland Secretary]. He would have brought the armed struggle to its knees".  Conspiracy theories Kevin Cahill, an Irish investigative journalist, claims Neave was on the verge of a massive overhaul of the security services, possibly involving a merger of MI5 and MI6 and arising from his belief in corruption in the security services. Cahill suggests a link between Neave's killing, that of Sir Richard Sykes and the attempted murder of Christopher Tugendhat in December 1980. Cahill claims that Neave would have been head of the combined security services with Sykes and Tugendhat as his deputies, with Sykes responsible for foreign operations and Tugendhat responsible for home operations.Cahill claims to have had a conversation with a drunken Neave on St Patrick's Day 1979 in the foyer of the Irish embassy in London. Cahill had left a party and was waiting for a taxi. He saw Neave in the room and introduced himself to him as an admirer. Cahill claims that Neave was inebriated and responded "quite out of the blue" by saying "There are going to be changes here, big changes, soon. There is going to be cleaning of the stables... There has been serious corruption." Neave then said that there was "no use playing games. We have to win... We will win when the [corruption] is sorted out. Count on that." Cahill found Neave's remarks surprising because he seemed internally preoccupied with the UK, with his Northern Ireland brief "almost a sideline". Cahill also thought that Neave's mention of corruption meant Soviet penetration.Whilst working in the House of Commons as Paddy Ashdown's research assistant, Cahill claims to have had around six conversations with the security staff there. The most frequent remark was that "everyone knew" the story behind Neave's death but that no one could talk about it in detail because it would have been too dangerous. Cahill claims they did not believe INLA killed Neave but that it was an "inside job". Cahill concluded that Neave was killed by the security services; MI6 agents working with the CIA because Neave sought to prosecute senior figures in the intelligence establishment for corruption. Another person who did not accept the generally accepted version of events was Enoch Powell, the Ulster Unionist MP. Powell claimed in an interview with The Guardian on 9 January 1984 that the Americans had killed Neave, along with Lord Mountbatten and Robert Bradford MP. He claimed the evidence came from a member of the Royal Ulster Constabulary with whom he had a conversation. On 18 October 1986 Powell returned to the subject of Neave's death in a speech to Conservative students in Birmingham. He told them that INLA had not killed Neave, but that he had been  assassinated by "MI6 and their friends". Powell claimed Neave's Northern Ireland policy had been one of integration with the rest of the UK and that the Americans feared that this process, if implemented by Neave, would have been irreversible. His killing, alleged Powell, was intended to make the British Government adopt a policy more acceptable to America in her aim of a united Ireland within NATO.  Works  Saturday At MI9 (U.S. title: The Escape Room) They Have Their Exits Flames of Calais On Trial at Nuremberg Little Cyclone   Notes  External links    Airey Neave Trust Margaret Thatcher speech at Neave's memorial service in 1979 Read about Airey Neave on The UK National Archives' website.
Akaba of Dahomey   Akaba was the second King of the Kingdom of Dahomey, in present-day Benin, from 1685 until c.1716.  Akaba was born with a twin sister Hangbe as the oldest children of Houegbadja.  When he died, either of small pox or in battle, his sister became Regent and began preparing Akaba's oldest son Agbo Sassa for the throne.  In 1718, Agaja, the next oldest son after Akaba from Houegbadja, fought with Agbo Sassa and Hangbe and became the next King of Dahomey. King of DahomeyOral tradition records that Akaba was born with a twin sister Hangbe to Hougebadja.  In addition, a younger brother named Dosu (the traditional name for the first male born after twins in Fon who would later become King Agaja.  Hougebadja named Akaba his heir before he died and Akaba assumed the throne when his father died in about 1685.     In some versions, Akaba is the king who kills the chieftain Dan to establish the dominance of the Dahomey Kingdom over the Abomey plateau.   Akaba's administration began some of the military expansion off the Abomey plateau and increasing centralization of the Kingdom of Dahomey over the area.     Some of his most significant military activity was in the Ouémé River valley.  During this campaign in around 1715-1716, Akaba died either of smallpox, poisoning, or in battle.  Because his death was quite sudden, and his heir was still young, Edna Bay contends that his twin sister Hangbe became the regent until Agaja became the next king.  References
Al Taliaferro {{Infobox comics creator  }}
Alain Lipietz  Alain Lipietz (born September 19, 1947, Charenton-le-Pont as Alain Guy Lipiec) is a French engineer, economist and politician, a Member of the European Parliament, and a member of the French Green Party. EducationAlain Lipietz studied at the École polytechnique (entered in 1966) and the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées (diploma in 1971). He then obtained a master's degree in economy (1972).He became a researcher at the Institut de recherche des transports (transportation research institute, 1971–1973) and at the Centre d'études prospectives d'économie - Mathématiques appliquées à la planification (Center for prospective studies of economics - applied mathematics for planification, 1973–1999). He became a research director at CNRS in 1988. Since 1990, he is chief engineer at the Corps of Bridges and Roads (France). Since the beginning of his career, he has devoted himself to the analysis of social-economic relationships within human communities.  He is thought of as having contributed to the Regulation school of economic thought. Political activities Alain Lipietz is a former Maoist. He was a candidate of Les Verts for the legislative elections of 1986 in Seine-Saint-Denis, and became the national spokesperson of the French Green Party in 1997.He has been an elected representative of the Green Party at the European Parliament since 1999.Alain Lipietz also is an adviser to the Commission économique des Verts, a member of the Commission française du développement durable (since 2000) and a member of the Conseil d'établissement du Collège de France (since 2001).On 21 June 2001, Alain Lipietz was elected candidate of the French Green Party for 2002 presidential elections. With 50% of the votes cast in the party's primaries, Lipietz narrowly beat rival candidate Noël Mamère. However, a first controversy arose during summer 2001, when Alain Lipietz seemed to have appeared sympathetic to separatists jailed for planting bombs in Corsica. A second controversy was the issue of reopening the Mont Blanc Tunnel between France and Italy, which had been closed since 1999 after 39 people died in a fire. Meanwhile, the party dropped from seven to five percent support in opinion polls.Finally, on 14 October 2001, Les Verts managed to survive a major internal crisis and changed candidate, dropping Alain Lipietz to choose Noël Mamère, who had made the irrevocable decision not to run a day sooner. Court challenge to SNCFIn a precedent-setting case brought by Alain and his sister, SNCF, the national railway of France, was ordered on June 6, 2006, to pay almost $80,000 in reparations for transporting members of their family to the Drancy deportation camp during World War II.  SNCF argued at trial that they were at the time under orders of the German military; the railroad further argued that the German military threatened to shoot any railroad official who disobeyed their orders.  The court disagreed with SNCF concluding that there was no way that SNCF could have avoided knowledge of the prisoners' likely deportation to concentration camps and that SNCF made no effort to either protest the transportation or to transport them in a humane manner.  Main publicationsHe is the author of:  Green Hopes. The Future of Political Ecology (1993) (Vert-espérance. Le futur de l'écologie politique) Berlin, Bagdad, Rio - XXIst Century Has begun (1992) (Bagdad, Rio: le XXIè siècle est commencé)  He also published books focusing on the French and Third World political economy:  Mirages and Miracles. Fortune and Misportunes of Global Fordism (1985) (Mirages et miracles. Problèmes de l'industrialisation dans le Tiers-Monde) To Swim or to Sink. On Economic Policies of the Frend Left Governments (1984) (L'audace ou l'enlisement. Sur les politiques économiques de la gauche)  Other publications  The Wealth of Regions. Towards a Socio-economical Geography. Editor with G.Benko (2000) What is Political Ecology ? The Great Transformation of XXIst century (1998) Hour-glass Society. Job Sharing vs Social Exclusion (1996) Phaedra : Identification of a Crime (1992) The Winning Regions (edited with G. Benko, 1992) Towards a New Economic Order. Post-Fordism, Ecology, Democracy (1989) The crisis (with Clerc & Satre-Buisson, 1983) The Enchanted World. Inflation, Credit and the Global Crises (1982) Crisis and Inflation : Why ? (1979) Capital and its Space (1977) The Urban Land Tribute (1974)  He has also worked on many of the EC directives regarding the financial sector. (1990–2010) References  External links   Personal Website Bio as a former student of Polytechnique Blog of Lipietz and friends Alain Lipietz on Political Ecology and the Future of Marxism Alain Lipietz - The post-Fordist world: labour relations, international hierarchy and global ecology Alain Lipietz - Working for world ecological sustainability Du jardin à la planète Ce soir, je n'ai pas envie...
Alain Resnais   Alain Resnais ( ; born 3 June 1922) is a French film director whose career has extended over more than six decades. After training as a film editor in the mid-1940s, he went on to direct a number of short films which included Nuit et Brouillard (Night and Fog) (1955), an influential documentary about the Nazi concentration camps. Ephraim Katz, The International Film Encyclopedia. (London: Macmillan, 1980.) p.966-967.  He began making feature films in the late 1950s and consolidated his early reputation with  Hiroshima mon amour (1959), Last Year at Marienbad (1961), and Muriel (1963), all of which adopted unconventional narrative techniques to deal with themes of troubled memory and the imagined past. These films were contemporary with, and associated with, the French New Wave or nouvelle vague, though Resnais did not regard himself as being fully part of that movement. He had closer links to the 'Left Bank group' of authors and filmmakers who shared a commitment to modernism and an interest in left-wing politics. He also established a regular practice of working on his films in collaboration with writers usually unconnected with the cinema, such as Marguerite Duras, Alain Robbe-Grillet and Jorge Semprún.  Peter Cowie,  The Explosion of World Cinema in the 60s. (London: Faber, 2004.) p.67.  International Dictionary of Films and Filmmakers - 2: Directors; 4th ed., edited by Tom Prendergast and Sara Prendergast. (New York, London: St James Press, 2000.) p.816. In later films Resnais moved away from the overtly political topics of some previous works and developed his interests in an interaction between cinema and other cultural forms, including theatre, music, and comic books. This led to imaginative adaptations of two plays by Alan Ayckbourn, and two different styles of musical in On connaît la chanson (Same Old Song) (1997) and Pas sur la bouche (Not on the Lips) (2003). Une histoire du cinéma français, [edited by] Claude Beylie. (Paris: Larousse, 2005.) p.501.  Interview with Gilbert Adair in The Guardian, 22 June 2010.  His films have frequently explored the relationship between consciousness, memory, and the imagination, and he is noted for devising innovative formal structures for his narratives.  Encyclopedia of European Cinema; edited by Ginette Vincendeau. (London: Cassell, British Film Institute, 1995.) p.358.  Throughout his career he has won many awards from international film festivals and academies. Early lifeAlain Resnais was born in 1922 at Vannes in Brittany, where his father was a pharmacist.   He was an only child, and throughout his childhood he was often ill with asthma, which led to his being withdrawn from school and educated at home.   He was an eager reader, in a range that extended from classics to comic-books, but from the age of 10 he became fascinated by films.  For his twelfth birthday his parents gave him a Kodak 8mm camera with which he began to make his own short films, including a three-minute version of Fantômas.   Around the age of 14 he discovered surrealism and through that an interest in the works of André Breton.   Visits to the theatre in Paris gave Resnais the desire to be an actor, and in 1939 he moved to Paris to become an assistant in Georges Pitoëff's company at the Théâtre des Mathurins.  From 1940 to 1942 he studied acting in the Cours René-Simon (and one of his small jobs at this time was as an extra in the film Les Visiteurs du soir ), but he then decided in 1943 to apply to the newly formed film school IDHEC to study film editing. James Monaco, Alain Resnais: the Rôle of Imagination. (London: Secker & Warburg, 1978.) p.17.   The film-maker Jean Grémillon was one of the teachers who had most influence on him at that period.   He left in 1945 to do his military service which took him to Germany and Austria with the occupying forces, as well as making him a temporary member of a travelling theatre company, Les Arlequins.   He returned to Paris in 1946 to start his career as a film editor, but also embarked on short films of his own.  Finding himself to be a neighbour of the actor Gérard Philipe, he persuaded him to appear in a 16mm surrealist short, Schéma d'une identification (now lost).   A more ambitious feature-length work, Ouvert pour cause d'inventaire, has also vanished without trace.  Career 1946-1958: Short filmsAfter beginning with a series of short documentary films showing artists at work in their studios, as well as a few commercial commissions, Resnais was invited in 1948 to make a film about the paintings of Van Gogh, to coincide with an exhibition that was being mounted in Paris. He filmed it at first in 16mm, but when the producer Pierre Braunberger saw the results, Resnais was asked to remake it in 35mm.  Van Gogh received a prize at the Venice Biennale in 1948, and also won an Oscar for Best 2-reel Short in 1949.  (Braunberger went on to act as producer for several of Resnais's films in the following decade.)  Resnais continued to address artistic subjects in Gauguin (1950) and Guernica (1950), which examined the Picasso painting based on the 1937 bombing of the town, and presented it to the accompaniment of a text written by Paul Éluard.   A political perspective on art also underpinned his next project, co-directed with Chris Marker, Les statues meurent aussi (Statues also Die), a polemic about the destruction of African art by French cultural colonialism. The Oxford History of World Cinema, ed. by Geoffrey Nowell-Smith. (Oxford: Oxford U.P., 1996.) p.332. Nuit et Brouillard (Night and Fog) (1955) was one of the first documentaries about the Nazi concentration camps, but it deals more with the memory of the camps than with their actual past existence. Realising that standard documentary techniques would be incapable of confronting the enormity of the horror (and even risked humanising it), Resnais chose to use a distancing technique by alternating historical black-and-white images of the camps with contemporary colour footage of the sites in long tracking shots. The accompanying narration (written by Jean Cayrol, himself a survivor of the camps) was intentionally understated to add to the distancing effect. Although the film encountered censorship problems with the French government, its impact was immense and it remains one of the director's most admired works.  A different kind of collective memory was considered in Toute la mémoire du monde (1956), in which the seemingly endless spaces and bibliographic riches of the Bibliothèque nationale were explored in another compendium of long travelling shots.  In 1958 Resnais undertook a commission from the Pechiney company to make short film, in colour and wide-screen, extolling the merits of plastics, Le Chant du styrène. Poetry was brought to the project, literally, by Raymond Queneau who wrote the narration for the film in rhyming couplets. In his decade of making documentary short films, Resnais had established his interest in and talent for collaboration with leading figures in other branches of the arts; with the painters who were the subjects of his early works; with writers (Eluard in Guernica, Cayrol in Nuit et Brouillard, Queneau in Le Chant du styrène); with musicians (Darius Milhaud in Gauguin, Hanns Eisler in Nuit et Brouillard, Pierre Barbaud in Le Chant du styrène); and with other film-makers (Resnais was the editor of Agnès Varda's first film, La Pointe courte, and co-directed with Chris Marker Les statues meurent aussi).  Similar collaborations underpinned his future work in feature films.  1959-1967Resnais's first feature film was Hiroshima mon amour in 1959.  It had originated as a commission from the producers of Nuit et Brouillard (Anatole Dauman and Argos Films) to make a documentary about the atomic bomb, but Resnais initially declined, thinking that it would be too similar to the earlier film about the concentration camps;  it presented the same problem of how to film incomprehensible suffering.  Then however in discussion with the novelist Marguerite Duras a fusion of fiction and documentary was developed which acknowledged the impossibility of speaking about Hiroshima; one could only speak about the impossibility of speaking about Hiroshima.  The themes of memory and forgetting were explored in a new narrative technique which balanced images with narrated text and ignored conventional notions of plot and story development.   The film was shown at the 1959 Cannes Film Festival, alongside Truffaut's Les Quatre Cents Coups, and its success became associated with the emerging movement of the New Wave. Resnais's next film was Last Year at Marienbad (1961), which he made in collaboration with the novelist Alain Robbe-Grillet.  The tantalisingly fragmented and shifting narrative presents three principal characters, a woman and two men, in the opulent setting of a grand European hotel or château where the possibility of a previous encounter a year ago is repeatedly asserted and questioned and contradicted.  After winning the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival, the film attracted great attention and provoked many divergent interpretations of how it should be understood, encouraged by interviews in which Robbe-Grillet and Resnais themselves appeared to give conflicting explanations of the film.  There was little doubt however that it represented a significant challenge to the traditional concept of narrative construction in cinema. At the beginning of the 1960s France remained deeply divided by the Algerian War, and in 1960 the Manifesto of the 121, which protested against French military policy in Algeria, was signed by a group of leading intellectuals and artists who included Alain Resnais. The war, and the difficulty of coming to terms with its horrors, was a central theme of his next film Muriel (1963), which used a fractured narrative to explore the mental states of its characters. It was among the first French films to comment, even indirectly, on the Algerian experience. A contemporary political issue also formed the background for La guerre est finie (The War Is Over) (1966), this time the clandestine activities of left-wing opponents of the Franco régime in Spain. Resnais's scriptwriter on this film was the Spanish author Jorge Semprun, himself an ex-member of the Spanish Communist Party now in voluntary exile in France.  Both men denied that the film was about Spain, but when it was entered for the official competition at the Cannes Film Festival in 1966, an objection from the Spanish government caused it to be withdrawn and it was shown out of competition.  In 1967 Resnais participated with six other directors, including Chris Marker and Jean-Luc Godard, in a collective work about the Vietnam war, Loin du Vietnam (Far from Vietnam). 1968-1980From 1968 onwards, the films of Resnais no longer addressed, at least directly, big political issues in the way that a number of his previous ones had done,  and his next project seemed to mark a change of direction.  Je t'aime, je t'aime (1968) drew upon the traditions of science-fiction for a story of a man sent back into his past, a theme which enabled Resnais again to present a narrative of fragmented time. The film was unlucky in its release (its planned screening at Cannes was cancelled amid the political events of May 1968), and it was almost five years before Resnais was able to direct another film.   Resnais spent part of that period in America working on various unfulfilled projects, including one about the Marquis de Sade.  He also published Repérages, a volume of his photographs, taken between 1948 and 1971, of locations (many of them for 'possible films') in London, Scotland, Paris, Nevers, Lyon, New York and Hiroshima; Jorge Semprun wrote the introductory text.  Some of the photographs relate to a long-cherished but unfulfilled idea for a film based on the Harry Dickson stories by Jean Ray.After contributing an episode to L'An 01 (The Year 01) (1973), a collective film organised by Jacques Doillon, Resnais made a second collaboration with Jorge Semprun for Stavisky (1974), based on the life of the notorious financier and embezzler whose death in 1934 provoked a political scandal. With glamorous costumes and sets, a musical score by Stephen Sondheim, and Jean-Paul Belmondo in the title-role, it was seen as Resnais's most commercial film to date, but its complex narrative structure showed clear links with some of the formal preoccupations of his earlier films. With Providence (1977), Resnais made his first film in English, with a screenplay written by David Mercer, and a distinguished cast that included John Gielgud and Dirk Bogarde.  The story shows an ageing, maybe dying, novelist grappling with alternative versions of his own past as he adapts them for his fiction. Resnais was eager that the dark subject should remain humorous, and he described it as "a macabre divertissement".  Formal innovation characterised Mon oncle d'Amérique (My American Uncle) (1980) in which the theories of the neurobiologist Henri Laborit about animal behaviour are juxtaposed with three interwoven fictional stories; and a further counterpoint to the fictional characters is provided by the inclusion of film extracts of the classic French film actors with whom they identify.  The film won several international awards including the Grand Prix at the Cannes Film Festival, and it also proved to be one of Resnais's most successful with the public.  1981-From the 1980s onwards Resnais has shown a particular interest in integrating material from other forms of popular culture into his films, drawing especially on music and the theatre.   In almost all of his films since this period he has also chosen to work repeatedly with a core group of actors comprising Sabine Azéma, Pierre Arditi, and André Dussollier, sometimes accompanied by Fanny Ardant or Lambert Wilson.  The first four of these were among the large cast of La vie est un roman (Life Is a Bed of Roses) (1983), a comic fantasy about utopian dreams in which three stories, from different eras and told in different styles, are interwoven within a shared setting. The action is punctuated by episodes of song which develop towards the end into scenes that are almost operatic; Resnais said that his starting point had been the desire to make a film in which dialogue and song would alternate.   Music, very differently used, was a major component of L'Amour à mort (Love unto Death) (1984). For this intense chamber work with four principal actors (Azéma, Arditi, Ardant and Dussollier), Resnais asked Hans Werner Henze to compose musical episodes which would act as a "fifth character", not an accompaniment but a fully integrated element of the drama with which the speech of the actors would interact.  In subsequent years, Resnais gave his attention to music of more popular styles. He made Gershwin (1992), an innovative TV documentary in which the American composer's life and works were reviewed through the testimonies of performers and filmmakers, juxtaposed with commissioned paintings by Guy Peellaert. In On connaît la chanson (Same Old Song) (1997), his tribute to television works of Dennis Potter, the characters express their key emotions or private thoughts by bursting into snatches of well-known (recorded) popular songs without interrupting the dramatic situation.   A long-neglected operetta from the 1920s was the unexpected basis for Resnais's next film Pas sur la bouche (Not on the Lips) (2003), in which he sought to reinvigorate an unfashionable form of entertainment by recreating its theatricality for the camera and entrusting most of its musical numbers to actors rather than to trained singers. References to the theatre are plentiful throughout Resnais's filmmaking (Marienbad, Muriel, Stavisky, Mon oncle d'Amérique), but he first undertook the challenge of taking a complete stage work and giving it new cinematic life in Mélo (1986), an adaptation of Henry Bernstein's 1929 play of the same name. Resnais remained entirely faithful to the play (apart from shortening it) and he emphasised its theatricality by filming in long takes on large sets of evidently artificial design, as well as by marking off the acts of the play with the fall of a curtain.  After an excursion into the world of comic-books and cartoons (another of Resnais's enthusiasms) in I Want to Go Home (1989), an ambitious theatrical adaptation followed with the diptych of Smoking/No Smoking (1993):  Resnais, having admired the plays of Alan Ayckbourn for many years, chose to adapt what appeared the most intractable of them, Intimate Exchanges, a series of eight interlinked plays which follow the consequences of a casual choice to sixteen possible endings.  Resnais slightly reduced the number of permuted endings and compressed the plays into two films, each having a common starting point, and to be seen in any order. Sabine Azéma and Pierre Arditi played all the parts, and the theatricality of the undertaking was again emphasised by the studio set designs for a fictional English village.   Resnais returned to Ayckbourn in the following decade for his adaptation of Private Fears in Public Places to which he gave the film title of Cœurs (2006). Among the stage/film effects which contribute to its mood of "cheerful desolation" is the artificial snow which is continually seen through set windows until eventually it falls on the studio interior as well. Speaking in 1986, Resnais said that he did not make a separation between cinema and theatre and refused to make enemies of them.  He preferred working with "people of the theatre", and he said that he would never want to film a novel.   It was therefore something of a departure when he chose L'Incident, a novel by Christian Gailly, as the basis for Les Herbes folles (Wild Grass) (2009).  He explained however that what initially attracted him to the book was the quality of its dialogue, which he retained largely unchanged for the film.  When Les Herbes folles was shown at the Cannes Film Festival, it was the occasion for a special jury award to Resnais "for his work and exceptional contribution to the history of cinema".   In spring 2011 Resnais completed filming Vous n'avez encore rien vu, which again took the theatre as its theme and background, and was loosely based on Jean Anouilh's 1941 play Eurydice.   The film was shown in competition for the Palme d'Or at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival.       Resnais's next film was announced as Aimer, boire et chanter, based upon Life of Riley by Alan Ayckbourn (making it his third project to be based on an Ayckbourn play); filming is scheduled to begin in December 2012.  ReputationResnais is often linked with the group of French filmmakers who made their breakthrough as the New Wave or nouvelle vague in the late 1950s, but by then he had already established a significant reputation through his ten years of work on documentary short films. He defined his own relationship by saying: "Although I was not fully part of the New Wave because of my age, there was some mutual sympathy and respect between myself and Rivette, Bazin, Demy, Truffaut...  So I felt friendly with that team."  He nevertheless acknowledged his debt to the New Wave because it created the conditions of production, and particularly the financial conditions, which allowed him to make a film like Hiroshima mon amour, his first feature film.  Resnais is more often associated with a 'Left Bank group' of writers and filmmakers who included Agnès Varda, Chris Marker, Jean Cayrol, Marguerite Duras and Alain Robbe-Grillet (with all of whom he collaborated in the earlier part of his career).  They were distinguished by their interests in documentary, left-wing politics, and the literary experiments of the nouveau roman.  At the same time, Resnais was also a devotee of popular culture. He owned the largest private collection of comic books in France and in 1962 became the vice president and co-founder of an International Society for Comic Books, Le Club des bandes dessinées, renamed two years later as Centre d'Études des Littératures d'Expression Graphique (CELEG).  CELEG members also included Resnais' artistic collaborators Marker and Robbe-Grillet.The importance of creative collaboration in Resnais's films has been noted by many commentators.   Unlike many of his contemporaries, he has always refused to write his own screenplays and has attached great importance to the contribution of his chosen writer, whose status in the shared "authorship" of the film he fully acknowledges.   He is also known to treat the completed screenplay with great fidelity, to the extent that some of his screenwriters have remarked on how closely the finished film has realised their intentions.  Time and memory have regularly been identified as two of the principal themes of Resnais's work, at least in his earlier films.   He has however consistently tried to modify this view of his concerns: "I prefer to speak of the imaginary, or of consciousness. What interests me in the mind is that faculty we have to imagine what is going to happen in our heads, or to remember what has happened".   He has also described his films as an attempt, however imperfect, to approach the complexity of thought and its mechanism. Another view of the evolution of Resnais's career has seen him moving progressively away from a realistic treatment of 'big' subjects and overtly political themes towards films that are increasingly personal and playful.  Resnais himself has offered an explanation of this shift in terms of challenging what has been the norm in film-making at the time; having made his early films when escapist cinema was predominant, he has progressively felt the need to move away from exploration of social and political issues as that has itself become almost the norm in contemporary cinema. Experimentation with narrative forms and genre conventions has instead become a central focus of his films.  A frequent criticism of Resnais's films among English-language commentators has been that they are emotionally cold; that they are all about technique without grasp of character or subject,  that his understanding of beauty is compromised by a lack of sensuousness,  and that his seriousness of intent fails to communicate itself to audiences.  Elsewhere however it is suggested that such views are partly based on a misreading of the films, especially his earlier ones, which has impeded an appreciation of the exhilarating humour and irony which pervade his work; and other viewers have been able to make the connection between the film's form and its human dimension.  There is general agreement about Resnais's attachment to formalism in his approach to film; he himself regards it as the starting point of his work, and usually has an idea of a form, or method of construction, in his head even before the plot or the characters take shape.  For him it is also the basis for the communication of feeling: "There cannot be any communication except through form. If there is no form, you cannot create emotion in the spectator." Another term which appears in commentaries on Resnais throughout his career is "surrealism", from his documentary portrait of a library in Toute la mémoire du monde,  through the dreamlike innovations of Marienbad,  to the latterday playfulness of Les Herbes folles.   Resnais himself traced a link to his teenage discovery of surrealism in the works of André Breton: "I hope that I always remain faithful to André Breton who refused to suppose that imaginary life was not a part of real life".  Personal lifeIn 1969 Resnais married Florence Malraux (daughter of the French statesman and writer André Malraux); she was a regular member of his production team, working as assistant director on most of his films from 1961 to 1986. His second wife is Sabine Azéma, who acted in the majority of his films from 1983 onwards; they were married in the English town of Scarborough in 1998.  Awards  Prix Jean Vigo: 1954, for Les statues meurent aussi; and 1956, for Nuit et Brouillard César Award: 1977 Best Director 1977, for Providence; and 1993 Best Director, for Smoking/No Smoking Prix Louis-Delluc: 1966, for La guerre est finie; 1993, for Smoking/No Smoking; and 1997, for On connaît la chanson Venice Film Festival: 1960 Golden Lion, for Last Year at Marienbad; and 2006 Silver Lion, for Cœurs Berlin Film Festival: 1994 Silver Bear for Smoking/No Smoking;    and 1998 Silver Bear, for On connaît la chanson    Cannes Film Festival: 1980 Grand Prix, for Mon oncle d'Amérique; and 2009, Lifetime achievement award.    Filmography     L'Aventure de Guy (1936) (unfinished) Schéma d'une identification (1946) (lost) Ouvert pour cause d'inventaire (1946) (lost) Visite à Oscar Dominguez (1947) (unfinished) Visite à Lucien Coutaud (1947) Visite à Hans Hartnung (1947) Visite à Félix Labisse (1947) Visite à César Doméla (1947) Portrait d'Henri Goetz (1947) Van Gogh (16mm) (1947) Journée naturelle (Visite à Max Ernst) (1947) La Bague (1947) L'Alcool tue (1947) (as Alzin Rezarail) Le Lait Nestlé (1947) Châteaux de France (Versailles) (1948) Van Gogh (35mm) (1948) Malfray (1948) Les Jardins de Paris (1948) (unfinished) Gauguin (1950) Guernica (1950) Pictura (Goya segment) (1952) Les statues meurent aussi (Statues Also Die) (1953) Nuit et Brouillard (Night and Fog) (1955) Toute la mémoire du monde (1956) Le Mystère de l'atelier quinze (1957)    Le Chant du styrène (1958) Hiroshima mon amour (1959) Last Year at Marienbad (1961) Muriel, ou le Temps d'un retour (1963) La guerre est finie (The War is Over) (1966) Loin du Vietnam (Far from Vietnam) ("Claude Ridder" segment) (1967) Je t'aime, je t'aime (1968) Cinétracts (segment, uncredited) (1968) L'An 01 (1973) (New York scenes) Stavisky (1974) Providence (1977) Mon oncle d'Amérique (My American Uncle) (1980) La vie est un roman (Life Is a Bed of Roses) (1983) L'Amour à mort (Love unto Death) (1984) Mélo (1986) I Want to Go Home (1989) Contre l'oubli (segment "Pour Esteban Gonzalez Gonzalez, Cuba") (1991) Gershwin (TV documentary) (1992) Smoking/No Smoking (1993) On connaît la chanson (Same Old Song) (1997) Pas sur la bouche (Not on the Lips) (2003) Cœurs (Private Fears in Public Places) (2006) Les Herbes folles (Wild Grass) (2009) Vous n'avez encore rien vu (You Ain't Seen Nothin' Yet!) (2012)   References  Further reading  Armes, Roy. The Cinema of Alain Resnais. London: Zwemmer, 1968. Benayoun, Robert. Alain Resnais: arpenteur de l'imaginaire. Paris: Ramsay, 2008. [In French]. Callev, Haim. The Stream of Consciousness in the Films of Alain Resnais. New York: McGruer Publishing, 1997. Liandrat-Guigues, Suzanne, & Jean-Louis Leutrat. Alain Resnais : liaisons secrètes, accords vagabonds. Paris: Cahiers du Cinéma, 2006. [In French]. Monaco, James. Alain Resnais: the Rôle of Imagination. London: Secker & Warburg, 1978. Thomas, François. L'Atelier d'Alain Resnais. Paris: Flammarion, 1989. [In French]. Wilson, Emma. Alain Resnais. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2006. Alain Resnais: anthologie établie par Stéphane Goudet. Paris: Gallimard, 2002. [Articles originally published in Positif, revue de cinéma. In French].   External links    Resnais biography in the New Wave Film Encyclopedia. Alain Resnais in Filmmaker magazine. Analysis of several Resnais films, at Strictly Film School.
Alan Bean     Alan LaVern Bean (born March 15, 1932) is a former NASA astronaut and a painter. Bean was selected to become an astronaut by NASA in 1963 as part of Astronaut Group 3. He made his first flight into space aboard Apollo 12, the second manned mission to land on the Moon, at the age of thirty-seven years in November 1969. During this mission, Bean became the fourth human to walk on the Moon. He made his second and final flight into space on the Skylab 3 mission in 1973, the second manned mission to the Skylab space station. After retiring from the United States Navy in 1975 and NASA in 1981, Bean pursued his interest in painting, depicting various space-related scenes and documenting his own experiences in space as well as that of his fellow Apollo Program astronauts. Early lifeBean was born in Wheeler, the seat of Wheeler County in the northeastern Texas Panhandle. He is of Scottish descent. As a boy, he lived in Minden, the seat of Webster Parish in northwestern Louisiana, where his father worked for the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. Bean graduated from R. L. Paschal High School in Fort Worth, Texas. He received a Bachelor of Science degree in aeronautical engineering from the University of Texas at Austin in 1955. At UT he was a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity (Omega Chi chapter). After a four year tour as a fighter pilot assigned to a jet attack squadron in Jacksonville, Florida,  he attended the U.S. Naval Test Pilot School, where his instructor was his future Apollo 12 Commander Pete Conrad. He then flew as a test pilot on several types of naval aircraft.He was awarded an honorary doctorate of science from Texas Wesleyan College in 1972, and was presented an honorary doctorate of engineering science degree from the University of Akron (Ohio) in 1974. NASA experience ApolloBean was selected by NASA as part of Astronaut Group 3 in 1963 (after not being selected for Astronaut Group 2 the previous year).   He was selected to be the backup Command Pilot for Gemini 10 but was unsuccessful in securing an early Apollo flight assignment.  He was placed in the Apollo Applications Program in the interim.  In that capacity, he is the first astronaut to dive in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator and a champion of the process for astronaut training.     When fellow astronaut Clifton Williams was killed in an air crash, a space was opened for Bean on the back-up crew for Apollo 9. Apollo 12 Commander Conrad, who had instructed Bean at the Naval Flight Test School years before, personally requested Bean to replace Williams.Bean was the lunar module pilot on Apollo 12, the second lunar landing. In November 1969, Al Bean and Pete Conrad landed in the Moon's Ocean of Storms—after a flight of 250,000 miles and a launch that included a harrowing lightning strike. Bean was the astronaut who executed John Aaron's famous "Flight, try SCE to 'Aux'" instruction to restore telemetry after the spacecraft was struck by lightning 36 seconds after launch, thus salvaging the mission. They explored the lunar surface, deployed several lunar surface experiments, and installed the first nuclear power generator station on the Moon to provide the power source. Dick Gordon remained in lunar orbit photographing landing sites for future missions.Bean had planned on using a self-timer for his Hasselblad camera in order to take a photograph of both himself and Pete Conrad while on the lunar surface near the Surveyor III spacecraft. Bean was hoping not only to record a wonderful photo, but also to confuse the scientists back home on how the photo could have been taken. However, neither he nor Conrad could locate the timer in the tool carrier tote bag while at the Surveyor III site and thus lost the opportunity. Bean did not locate the self-timer until the very end of the EVA when it was too late to use - at which point Bean threw it as hard as he could.  Bean’s paintings of what this photo would have looked like (titled "The Fabulous Photo We Never Took") and one of his fruitless search for the timer ("Our Little Secret") are included in his collection of Apollo paintings.  Bean's Moon suit is on display in the Fort Worth Museum of Science and History in Fort Worth, Texas.  SkylabBean was also the spacecraft commander of Skylab 3, the second manned mission to Skylab, July 29, 1973 to September 25, 1973. With him on the 59-day, 24,400,000 mile world record setting flight were scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen Garriott and Marine Corps Lieutenant Colonel Jack Lousma. During the mission Bean also tested a prototype of the Manned Maneuvering Unit and performed one space walk outside the Skylab. Post-flight experience On his next assignment, Bean was backup spacecraft commander of the United States flight crew for the joint American-Russian Apollo-Soyuz Test Project.Bean retired from the Navy in October 1975 as a Captain but continued as head of the Astronaut Candidate Operations and Training Group within the Astronaut Office in a civilian capacity. Awards and decorations  Navy Astronaut Wings Navy Distinguished Service Medal (2x) NASA Distinguished Service Medal (2x) Rear Admiral William S. Parsons Award for Scientific and Technical Progress University of Texas Distinguished Alumnus Award and Distinguished Engineering Graduate Award Godfrey L. Cabot Award National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences Trustees Award Texas Press Associations Man of the Year Award for 1969 City of Chicago Gold Medal Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1973 Federation Aeronautique Internationale Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for 1973 V.M. Komarov Diploma for 1973 (1974) Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy for 1975 (1975) AIAA Octave Chanute Award for 1975 (1975) AAS Flight Achievement Award for 1974 (1975)   Bean as an artist Bean resigned from NASA in June 1981 to devote his full time to painting. Many of his paintings reside on the walls of space enthusiasts. He said his decision was based on the fact that, in his 18 years as an astronaut, he was fortunate enough to visit worlds and see sights no artist's eye, past or present, has ever viewed firsthand and he hopes to express these experiences through the medium of art. He is pursuing this dream at his home and studio in Houston.As a painter, Bean wanted to add color to the Moon. "I had to figure out a way to add color to the Moon without ruining it," he remarked. If you look at his paintings, you will see the lunar landscape is not a monotonous gray, but shades of various colors. "If I were a scientist painting the Moon, I would paint it gray. I'm an artist, so I can add colors to the Moon." says Bean. Alan Bean's paintings include "Lunar Grand Prix" and "Rock and Roll on the Ocean of Storms". He is the only artist in the world to use real Moon dust on his paintings. When he began painting, he realized that keepsake patches from his space suit were dirty with Moon dust. He adds tiny pieces of the patches to his paintings, which make them unique. He also uses the hammer used to pound the flagpole into the lunar surface as well as a bronzed Moon boot to texture his paintings.   Personal life He is married and has two grown children, a son and a daughter.Bean took a little piece of MacBean tartan to the Moon.  Books  My Life As An Astronaut (1989) Apollo: An Eyewitness Account (with Andrew Chaikin) (1998) Into the Sunlit Splendor: The Aviation Art of William S. Phillips (with Ann Cooper, Charles S. Cooper and Wilson Hurley) (2005) Mission Control, This is Apollo: The Story of the First Voyages to the Moon (with Andrew Chaikin) (2009) Painting Apollo: First Artist on Another World (2009)  Bean's in-flight Skylab diary is featured in "Homesteading Space," a history of the Skylab program co-authored by fellow astronauts Joseph Kerwin and Owen Garriott and writer David Hitt, published in 2008. References  Further reading      External links  Alan Bean Online Gallery - An authorized gallery of all his paintings Alan Bean Astronaut Bio - NASA's biography of Bean Official publisher website for Homesteading Space
Alan Bennett        Alan Bennett (born 9 May 1934) is a British playwright, screenwriter, actor and author. Born in Leeds, West Riding of Yorkshire, he attended Oxford University where he studied history and performed with The Oxford Revue. He stayed to teach and research medieval history at the university for several years. His collaboration as writer and performer with Dudley Moore, Jonathan Miller and Peter Cook in the satirical revue Beyond the Fringe at the 1960 Edinburgh Festival brought him instant fame. He gave up academia, and turned to writing full-time, his first stage play Forty Years On being produced in 1968.His output includes The Madness of George III and its film incarnation The Madness of King George, the series of monologues Talking Heads, the play The History Boys, and popular audio books, including his readings of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and Winnie-the-Pooh. Early lifeBennett was born in Armley in Leeds, West Riding of Yorkshire. The son of a co-op butcher, Walter, and his wife Lilian Mary (née Peel), Bennett attended Christ Church, Upper Armley, Church of England School (in the same class as Barbara Taylor Bradford) and then Leeds Modern School (now Lawnswood School), learned Russian at the Joint Services School for Linguists during his national service and gained a place at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge.  However, having spent time in Cambridge during national service, and partly wishing to follow the object of his unrequited love, he decided to apply for a scholarship at Oxford University. He was accepted by Exeter College, Oxford from which he graduated with a first-class degree in history. While at Oxford he performed comedy with a number of eventually successful actors in the Oxford Revue. He was to remain at the university for several years, where he researched and taught Medieval History, before deciding he was not cut out to be an academic. CareerIn August 1960 Bennett, along with Dudley Moore, Jonathan Miller and Peter Cook, achieved instant fame by appearing at the Edinburgh Festival in the satirical revue Beyond the Fringe. After the festival, the show continued in London and New York. He also appeared in My Father Knew Lloyd George. A highly regarded television comedy sketch series On the Margin (1966) was unfortunately erased; the BBC re-used expensive videotape rather than keep it in the archives.Around this time Bennett often found himself playing vicars and claims that as an adolescent he assumed he would grow up to be a Church of England clergyman, for no better reason than that he looked like one.Bennett's first stage play Forty Years On directed by Patrick Garland was produced in 1968. Many television, stage and radio plays followed, with screenplays, short stories, novellas, a large body of non-fictional prose and broadcasting and many appearances as an actor.Bennett's distinctive, expressive voice (which bears a strong Leeds accent) and the sharp humour and evident humanity of his writing have made his readings of his work very popular, especially the autobiographical writings. Bennett's readings of the Winnie the Pooh stories are also widely enjoyed. Many of Bennett's characters are unfortunate and downtrodden. Life has brought them to an impasse or else passed them by. In many cases they have met with disappointment in the realm of sex and intimate relationships, largely through tentativeness and a failure to connect with others.Bennett is both unsparing and compassionate in laying bare his characters' frailties. This can be seen in his television plays for LWT in the late 1970s and the BBC in the early 1980s and in the 1987 Talking Heads series of monologues for television which were later performed at the Comedy Theatre in London in 1992. This was a sextet of poignantly comic pieces, each depicting several stages in the character's decline from an initial state of denial or ignorance of their predicament, through a slow realisation of the hopelessness of their situation, progressing to a bleak or ambiguous conclusion. A second set of six Talking Heads followed a decade later, which was darker and more disturbing.In his 2005 prose collection Untold Stories Bennett has written candidly and movingly of the mental illness that afflicted his mother and other family members. Much of his work draws on his Leeds background and while he is celebrated for his acute observations of a particular type of northern speech ("It'll take more than Dairy Box to banish memories of Pearl Harbour"), the range and daring of his work is often undervalued – his television play The Old Crowd includes shots of the director and technical crew, while his stage play The Lady in the Van includes two characters named Alan Bennett. The Lady in the Van was based on his experiences with a tramp called Miss Shepherd who lived on Bennett's driveway in several dilapidated vans for over fifteen years. A radio play of the same title was broadcast on 21 February 2009 on BBC Radio 4, with actress Maggie Smith reprising her role of Miss Shepherd and Alan Bennett playing himself. The work has also been published in book form. Alan Bennett also adapted "The Lady in the Van" for the stage.Bennett adapted his 1991 play The Madness of George III for the cinema. Entitled The Madness of King George (1994), the film received four Academy Award nominations : for Bennett's writing and the performances of Nigel Hawthorne and Helen Mirren. It won the award for best art direction. Bennett's critically acclaimed The History Boys won three Laurence Olivier Awards in 2005, for Best New Play, Best Actor (Richard Griffiths), and Best Direction (Nicholas Hytner), having previously won Critics' Circle Theatre Awards and Evening Standard Awards for Best Actor and Best Play. Bennett himself received the Laurence Olivier Award for Outstanding Contribution to British Theatre.  The History Boys also won six Tony Awards on Broadway, including best play, best performance by a leading actor in a play (Richard Griffiths), best performance by a featured actress in a play (Frances de la Tour), and best direction of a play (Nicholas Hytner). A film version of The History Boys was released in the UK in October 2006.Bennett wrote the play Enjoy in 1980. It was one of the rare flops in his career and barely scraped a run of seven weeks at the Vaudeville Theatre, in spite of the stellar cast of Joan Plowright, Colin Blakely, Susan Littler, Philip Sayer, Liz Smith (who replaced Joan Hickson during rehearsals) and in his first West End role Marc Sinden. It was directed by Ronald Eyre.  A new production of Enjoy attracted very favourable notices during its 2008 UK tour  and moved to the West End of London in January 2009.  The West End show took over £1m in advance ticket sales  and even extended the run to cope with demand.  The production starred Alison Steadman, David Troughton, Richard Glaves, Carol Macready and Josie Walker.At the National Theatre in late 2009 Nicholas Hytner directed Bennett's play The Habit of Art, about the relationship between the poet W.H. Auden and the composer Benjamin Britten. Bennett's next play People will open at the National Theatre in October 2012.  Personal lifeIn September 2005, Bennett revealed that, in 1997, he had undergone treatment for cancer, and described the illness as a "bore". His chances of survival were given as being "much less" than 50%.  He began Untold Stories (published 2005) thinking it would be published posthumously. In the event his cancer went into remission. In the autobiographical sketches which form a large part of the book Bennett writes openly for the first time about his homosexuality (Bennett has had relationships with women as well, although this is only touched upon in Untold Stories). Previously Bennett had referred to questions about his sexuality as like asking a man who has just crawled across the Sahara desert to choose between Perrier or Malvern mineral water. Bennett lives in Camden Town in London, and shares his home with Rupert Thomas, the editor of World of Interiors magazine.  Bennett also had a long-term relationship with his former housekeeper, Anne Davies, until her death in 2009.  In 2010, Bennett described how he was mugged by two women who surreptitiously squirted him with ice cream in Marks & Spencer, Camden Town. As they purported to wipe off the confection with tissues, the robbers stole £1,500 cash he had withdrawn from the bank minutes earlier. Bennett, who initially was grateful the women had helped clean him said the experience afterwards made him 'less likely to believe in the kindness of strangers.' How two women 'well-wishers' conned Sir Alan Bennett out of £1,500 in 'Mustard Squirter' scam By SIMON CABLE Last updated at 3:57 pm on 13 December 2010. Retrieved 14 May 2011    ArchiveIn October 2008 Bennett announced that he was donating his entire archive of working papers, unpublished manuscripts, diaries and books to the Bodleian Library, stating that it was a gesture of thanks repaying a debt he felt he owed to the British welfare state that had given him educational opportunities which his humble family background would otherwise never have afforded.  DepictionsAlong with the other members of Beyond the Fringe, Bennett is portrayed in the play Pete and Dud: Come Again, by Chris Bartlett and Nick Awde. Work  Television     My Father Knew Lloyd George (also writer), 1965 Famous Gossips, 1965 Plato—The Drinking Party, 1965 Alice in Wonderland, 1966 On the Margin series (actor & writer), 1966–67 A Day Out (also writer), 1972 Sunset Across the Bay (also writer), 1975 A Little Outing (also writer), 1975 A Visit from Miss Prothero (writer), 1978 Me—I'm Afraid of Virginia Woolf (writer), 1978 Doris and Doreen (Green Forms) (writer), 1978 The Old Crowd (writer) with Lindsay Anderson (director), LWT 1979 Afternoon Off (actor & writer), 1979 One Fine Day (writer), 1979 All Day On the Sands (writer), 1979 Objects of Affection (also writer), 1982 The Merry Wives of Windsor (actor), 1982 Intensive Care (writer, actor), 1982 An Englishman Abroad (writer), 1983 The Insurance Man (writer), 1986 Breaking Up, 1986 Man and Music (narrator), 1986 Talking Heads (also writer), 1987    The Wind in the Willows , The Willows in Winter (Mole), 1995–1996 The Story Store (Voices and Narrator), 1995 Meg and Mog (Owl) Down Cemetery Road: The Landscape of Philip Larkin (presenter), 1987 Fortunes of War series (actor), 1987 Dinner at Noon (narrator), 1988 Poetry in Motion (presenter), 1990 102 Boulevard Haussmann (writer), 1990 A Question of Attribution (writer), 1991 Selling Hitler, 1991 Poetry in Motion 2 (presenter), 1992 A Night In (presenter), 1992 The Long Summer (narrator), 1993 Portrait or Bust (presenter), 1994 The Abbey (presenter), 1995 A Dance to the Music of Time (actor), 1997 Talking Heads 2, 1998 Telling Tales (writer, as himself), 2000 The South Bank Show (documentary), 2005 Being Alan Bennett (BBC documentary), 2009 Mark Lawson Talks To Alan Bennett (BBC, extended interview), 2009 Bennett On Bennett (5 10-minute monologues, as himself), 2009        Stage  Better Late, 1959 Beyond the Fringe (also co-writer), 1960 The Blood of the Bambergs, 1962 A Cuckoo in the Nest, 1964 Forty Years On (also writer), 1968 Sing a Rude Song (co-writer), 1969 Getting On (writer), 1971 Habeas Corpus (also writer), 1973 The Old Country (writer), 1977 Enjoy (writer), 1980 Kafka's Dick (writer), 1986 A Visit from Miss Prothero (writer), 1987 Single Spies (An Englishman Abroad and A Question of Attribution) (also writer and director) The Wind in the Willows (adaptation), 1990 The Madness of George III (writer), 1991 Talking Heads (Waiting for the telegram, A Chip in the Sugar, Bed Among the Lentils, A Lady of Letters, Her Big Chance, Soldiering On, A Cream Cracker Under the Settee) (also writer), 1992 The History Boys (writer), 2004 The Habit of Art (writer), 2009 People (writer), 2012   Film  Long Shot, 1980 Dreamchild (voice only), 1985 The Secret Policeman's Ball, 1986 The Secret Policeman's Other Ball, 1982 A Private Function (screenplay), 1986 Pleasure At Her Majesty's, 1987 Prick Up Your Ears (screenplay), 1987 Little Dorrit, 1987 Wind in the Willows animated adaptation, 1994 Parson's Pleasure (writer), 1995 The Madness of King George (screenplay from his play "The Madness of George III" and cameo appearance), 1995 The History Boys (screenplay, from his play of the same name), 2006   Radio  The Great Jowett, 1980 Dragon, 1982 Uncle Clarence (writer, narrator), 1985 Better Halves (narrator), 1988 The Lady in the Van (writer, narrator), 1990 Winnie-the-Pooh (narrator), 1990    Books  Beyond the Fringe (with Peter Cook, Jonathan Miller, and Dudley Moore). London: Souvenir Press, 1962, and New York: Random House, 1963 Forty Years On, London: Faber, 1969 Getting On, London: Faber, 1972 Habeas Corpus, London: Faber, 1973 The Old Country, London: Faber, 1978 Enjoy, London: Faber, 1980 Office Suite, London: Faber, 1981 Objects of Affection, London: BBC Publications, 1982 A Private Function, London: Faber, 1984 Forty Years On; Getting On; Habeas Corpus, London: Faber, 1985 The Writer in Disguise, London: Faber, 1985 Prick Up Your Ears: The Film Screenplay, London: Faber, 1987 Two Kafka Plays, London: Faber, 1987 Talking Heads, London: BBC Publications, 1988; New York: Summit, 1990 Single Spies, London: Faber, 1989 Single Spies and Talking Heads, New York: Summit, 1990 The Lady in the Van, 1989 Poetry in Motion, (with others). 1990 The Wind in the Willows, London: Faber, 1991 Forty Years On and Other Plays, London: Faber, 1991 The Madness of George III, London: Faber, 1992 Poetry in Motion 2 (with others) 1992 Writing Home (memoir & essays) London: Faber, 1994 The Madness of King George (screenplay), 1995 Father ! Father ! Burning Bright (prose version of 1982 TV script, Intensive Care), 1999 The Laying on of Hands (stories), 2000 The Clothes They Stood Up In (novella), 2001 Untold Stories (autobiographical and essays), London, 2005, ISBN 0-571-22830-5 The Uncommon Reader (novella), London, 2007 A Life Like Other People's (memoir), London, 2009 Smut: two unseemly stories (stories), London, 2011   Audio releases     Alan Bennett At The BBC (compilation) Diaries 1980–1990 Diaries 1997–2004 Telling Tales Hymn The Lady In The Van Alan And Thora Untold Stories Written On The Body A Common Assault Beyond The Fringe Alan Bennett's On The Margin Forty Years On (1973 version) Forty Years On (2003 version) Kafka's Dick An Englishman Abroad (1983 version) An Englishman Abroad (2006 version) A Question Of Attribution The Madness Of King George III The History Boys The Lady In The Van (play)    A Woman Of No Importance The Clothes They Stood Up In The Laying On Of Hands Father! Father! Burning Bright Say Something Happened A Visit From Miss Protheroe Two In Torquay The Uncommon Reader Dear Philip, Dear Kingsley (with Robert Hardy) Poetry In Motion Winnie The Pooh (narrator) The House At Pooh Corner (narrator) A Party For Pooh (narrator) The Wind In The Willows (narrator) Peter Pan And Wendy (narrator) The Story Of Doctor Dolittle (narrator) The Voyages Of Doctor Dolittle (narrator) Doctor Dolittle's Garden (narrator) The Owl & The Pussycat (narrator) The Little Prince (narrator) Animal Farm (narrator) Alice in Wonderland and Through The Looking-Glass (narrator)        Awards and honours  Awards  1963 Special Tony Award: Beyond the Fringe (shared with Peter Cook, Jonathan Miller and Dudley Moore) 1963 New York Drama Critics' Circle Award, Special Award: Beyond the Fringe (shared with Peter Cook, Jonathan Miller and Dudley Moore) 1968 Evening Standard Award, Special Award: Forty Years On 1985 Evening Standard British Film Award, Best Screenplay: A Private Function (shared with Malcolm Mowbray) 1987 Critics' Circle Film Award, Screenwriter of the Year: Prick Up Your Ears 1987 Evening Standard British Film Award, Best Screenplay: Prick Up Your Ears 1990 Laurence Olivier Award, Best New Comedy: Single Spies 1992 British Academy Television Award, Best Single Drama: A Question of Attribution 1992 Laurence Olivier Award, Best Entertainment: Talking Heads 1992 Laurence Olivier Award, Best Actor in a Musical: Talking Heads 1995 Critics' Circle Film Award, Screenwriter of the Year: The Madness of King George 1995 Evening Standard British Film Award, Best Screenplay: The Madness of King George 1995 British Book Award, Book of the Year: Writing Home 1996 British Academy Film Award, Alexander Korda Award for Best British Film: The Madness of King George 2000 British Comedy Award, Lifetime Achievement Award 2002 British Book Award, Audiobook of the Year: The Laying on of Hands 2003 New York Drama Critics' Circle Award, Best Foreign Play: Talking Heads 2003 British Book Award, Lifetime Achievement Award 2004 Critics' Circle Theatre Award, Best New Play: The History Boys 2004 Evening Standard Award, Best Play: The History Boys 2005 Laurence Olivier Award, Best New Play: The History Boys 2005 Laurence Olivier Award, Society of London Theatre Special Award 2005 Critics' Circle Award for Distinguished Service to the Arts 2006 Drama Desk Award, Outstanding Play: The History Boys 2006 New York Drama Critics' Circle Award, Best Play: The History Boys 2006 Outer Critics Circle Award, Outstanding Broadway Play: The History Boys 2006 Tony Award, Best Play: The History Boys 2006 J. R. Ackerley Prize for Autobiography: Untold Stories 2006 British Book Award, Author of the Year 2008 Bodley Medal   Nominations  1984 British Academy Film Award, Best Original Screenplay: A Private Function 1987 British Academy Film Award, Best Adapted Screenplay: Prick Up Your Ears 1989 British Academy Television Award, Best Actor: A Chip in the Sugar 1989 British Academy Television Award, Best Drama Series: A Cream Cracker under the Settee (shared with Innes Lloyd) 1989 British Academy Television Award, Best Single Drama: A Bed Among the Lentils (shared with Innes Lloyd) 1989 British Academy Television Award, Best Single Drama: A Lady of Letters (shared with Innes Lloyd and Giles Foster) 1994 Academy Award, Best Adapted Screenplay: The Madness of King George 1995 British Academy Film Award, Best Adapted Screenplay: The Madness of King George 1999 British Academy Television Award, Best Single Drama: Waiting for the Telegram (shared with Mark Shivas and Stuart Burge) 1999 British Academy Television Award, Best Single Drama: Playing Sandwiches (shared with Mark Shivas and Udayan Prasad) 2003 Drama Desk Award, Outstanding Play: Talking Heads 2003 Outer Critics Circle Award, Outstanding Off-Broadway Play: Talking Heads 2006 Samuel Johnson Prize: Untold Stories 2007 GLAAD Media Award, Outstanding Film - Limited Release: The History Boys  Bennett was made an Honorary Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford in 1987. He was also awarded a D.Litt by the University of Leeds in 1990  and an honorary doctorate from Kingston University in 1996. In 1998 he refused an honorary doctorate from Oxford University, in protest at its acceptance of funding for a chair from press baron Rupert Murdoch.  He also declined a CBE in 1988 and a knighthood in 1996.  He has stated that, although he is not a republican, he would never wish to be knighted, saying it would be a bit like having to wear a suit for the rest of his life.  Bennett earned Honorary Membership of The Coterie in the 2007 membership list.In December 2011 Bennett returned to Lawnswood School, nearly 60 years after he left, to unveil the renamed Alan Bennett Library.  He said he "loosely" based The History Boys on his experiences at the school and his admission to Oxford. Lawnswood School dedicated its library to the writer after he emerged as a vocal campaigner against public library cuts.  Plans to shut local libraries were "wrong and very short-sighted", Bennett said, adding: "We're impoverishing young people." References  Further reading  Peter Wolfe, Understanding Alan Bennett, University of South Carolina Press, ISBN 1-57003-280-7   Joseph H. O'Mealy, Alan Bennett: A Critical Introduction, Routledge, 2007 Kara McKechnie, Alan Bennett, The Television Series, Manchester University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-7190-6806-5 Robert Hewison Footlights – A Hundred Years of Cambridge Comedy, Methuen, 1983 Roger Wilmut From Fringe to Flying Circus – Celebrating a Unique Generation of Comedy 1960–1980, Eyre Methuen, 1980   External links   Profile at the British Council Interview BBC archive 6 December 2009 with Mark Lawson. (Video, 1 hr) BBC Interview Radio 4 Front Row archive. (Audio, 1 hr) Portraits at the National Portrait Gallery (3 pages) "Curtain re-opens on Bennett play" BBC News, 29 January 2009 – Video interview with Alan Bennett Profile. British Film Institute: Screenonline Guardian profile "Birthday boy" 7 May 2009 by Blake Morrison. Alan Bennett Macmillan Books
Alan Paton  Alan Stewart Paton (11 January 1903 – 12 April 1988) was a South African author and anti-apartheid activist. FamilyPaton was born in Pietermaritzburg, Natal Province (now KwaZulu-Natal), the son of a minor civil servant.  After attending Maritzburg College, he earned a Bachelor of Science degree at the University of Natal  in his hometown, followed by a diploma in education. After graduation, Paton worked as a teacher, first at the Ixopo High School, and subsequently at a Maritzburg College  While at Ixopo he met Dorrie Francis Lusted.  They were married in 1928 and remained together until her death from emphysema in 1967.  Their life together is documented in Paton's book Kontakion for You Departed, published in 1969. Early careerHe served as the principal of Diepkloof Reformatory for young (African Black) offenders from 1935 to 1949, where he introduced controversial reforms of a progressive slant, Alan (Stewart) Paton (1903-1988)  including policies on open dormitories, work permits, and home visitation. Boys were initially housed in closed dormitories; once they had proven themselves trustworthy, they would be transferred to open dormitories within the compound. Boys who showed high levels of trustworthiness would be permitted to work outside the compound. In some cases, boys were even permitted to reside outside the compound under the supervision of a care family. Fewer than 1% of ten thousand boys given home leave during Paton's years at Diepkloof ever broke their trust by failing to return. After PublishingAfter the publishing of multiple books in 1950, Paton was moved from lower class life to middle/upper class off the wealth of his books.Paton volunteered for service during World War II, but was refused. After the war he took a trip, at his own expense, to tour correctional facilities across the world. He toured Scandinavia, England, continental Europe, Canada, and the United States of America. During his time in Norway, he began work on his seminal novel Cry, The Beloved Country, which he completed over the course of his journey, finishing it on Christmas Eve in San Francisco in 1946.  There, he met Aubrey and Marigold Burns, who read his manuscript and found a publisher: the editor Maxwell Perkins, noted for editing novels of Ernest Hemingway and Thomas Wolfe, guided Paton's first novel through publication with Scribner's. Opposition to apartheidIn 1948, four months after the publication of Cry, The Beloved Country, the separatist National Party came to power in South Africa. In 1953 Paton founded the Liberal Party of South Africa, which fought against the apartheid legislation introduced by the National Party. He remained the president of the SALP until its forced dissolution by the apartheid regime in the late 1960s, officially because its membership comprised both blacks and whites. Paton was a friend of Bernard Friedman, founder of the Progressive Party (South Africa).   Paton's writer colleague Laurens van der Post, who had moved to England in the 1930s, helped the party in many ways. Van der Post knew that the South African Secret Police was aware that he was paying money to Paton, but could not stop it by legal procedures. Paton himself adopted a peaceful opposition to protests against apartheid, as did many others in the party; some SALP members took a more violent route, and consequently some stigma did attach to the party. Paton's passport was confiscated on his return from New York in 1960, where he had been presented with the annual Freedom Award.    It was not returned for ten years.Paton retired to Botha's Hill, where he resided until his death. He is honored at the Hall of Freedom of the Liberal International organization.  Other worksPaton's second and third novels, Too Late the Phalarope (1953) and Ah, but Your Land is Beautiful (1981), and his short stories, Tales From a Troubled Land (1961), all deal with the same racial themes that concerned the author in his first novel.  Ah, but Your Land is Beautiful was built on parallel life stories, letters, speeches, news and records in legal proceedings, and mixed fictional and real-life characters, such as Donald Molteno, Albert Lutuli and Hendrik Verwoerd. The novel is categorised as historical fiction, as it gives an accurate account of the resistance movement in South Africa during the 1960s. "Paton attempts to imbue his characters with a humanity not expected of them. In this novel, for example, we meet the supposedly obdurate Afrikaner who contravenes the infamous Immorality Act. There are other Afrikaners, too, who are led by their consciences and not by rules, and regulations promulgated by a faceless, monolithic parliament." Paton was a prolific essay writer on race and politics in South Africa. In Save the Beloved Country he plays on the famous title of his first novel, but keeps a serious tone in discussing many of the famous personalities and issues on different sides of South Africa's apartheid struggle. His Anglican faith was another factor in his life and work: the title of one work is Instrument of Thy Peace. Paton also wrote two autobiographies: Towards the Mountain deals with Paton's life leading up to and including the publication of Cry, the Beloved Country (an event that changed the course of his life) while Journey Continued takes its departure from that time onwards. He also wrote a biography of his friends Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr (Hofmeyr), and Geoffrey Clayton (Apartheid and the Archbishop). Another literary form that interested him throughout his life was poetry; the biographer Peter Alexander includes many of these poems in his biography of Paton. Publications of Paton's work include a volume of his travel writing, The Lost City of the Kalahari (2006), and a complete selection of his shorter writings, The Hero of Currie Road. Selected works   Cry, The Beloved Country, 1948 - film 1951, dir. by Zoltan Korda Lost in the Stars 1950 (with Maxwell Anderson - set to music by Kurt Weill) Too Late the Phalarope, 1953 The Land and People of South Africa, 1955 South Africa in Transition, 1956 Debbie Go Home, 1960 Tales from a Troubled Land, 1961 Hofmeyr, 1964 South African Tragedy, 1965 Spono, 1965 (with Krishna Shah) The Long View, 1967 Instrument of Thy Peace, 1968 Kontakio For You Departed, 1969 (also: For You Departed) Case History of a Pinky, 1972 Apartheid and the Archbishop: the Life and Times of Geoffrey Clayton, Archbishop of Cape Town, 1973 Knocking on the Door, 1975 Towards the Mountain, 1980 Ah, but Your Land is Beautiful, 1981 Journey Continued: An Autobiography, 1988 Save the Beloved Country, 1989 The Hero of Currie Road: the complete short pieces, 2008    Cry, The Beloved Country has been filmed twice (in 1951 and 1995) and was the basis for the Broadway musical Lost in the Stars (adaptation by Maxwell Anderson, music by Kurt Weill).The Alan Paton Award for non-fiction is conferred annually in his honour. Further reading       See also  Liberalism Contributions to liberal theory List of African writers List of South Africans — In 2004 Paton was voted 59th in the SABC3's Great South Africans   Notes  External links  The Alan Paton Centre & Struggle Archives Alan Paton — A short biography and bibliography     A mixture of ice and fulfilled desire, Mail & Guardian, Nov 14 2005
Alan Shearer        Alan Shearer OBE, DL (born 13 August 1970) is a retired English footballer. He played as a striker in the top level of English league football for Southampton, Blackburn Rovers, Newcastle United and for the England national team. He is considered by some as one of England's best strikers, being both Newcastle's and the Premier League's record goalscorer. After retiring as a player in 2006, Shearer worked as a television pundit for the BBC. In 2009 he briefly left his BBC role to become Newcastle United's manager in the last eight games of their 2008–09 season, in an unsuccessful attempt to save them from relegation.A native of Newcastle upon Tyne, Shearer made his professional debut with English top-flight club Southampton in 1988, scoring a hat-trick in the process. During several years on the south coast, he became known for his classic style of play, strength and goalscoring ability; he soon received an international call-up along with a transfer to Blackburn Rovers in 1992. Shearer established himself as a player in northern England; he became a regular in the England squad, and his 34-goal tally helped Blackburn secure the Premier League title in 1994–95. He was named Football Writers' Association Player of the Year in 1994 and won the PFA Player of the Year award in 1995. The 1995–96 season saw Shearer make his first Champions League appearances and finish as the top scorer in the Premier League with 31 goals. He was also top scorer at Euro 1996 with England, scoring five goals, and in the 1996–97 Premier League, with 25 goals. He scored 283 league goals in his career, including a record 260 in the Premier League, and a total of 422 in all competitions including international at all levels.  Shearer has amassed a goals to game ratio of 0.667 throughout his career at every level.A world-record £15 million move to his boyhood heroes, Newcastle United, followed the Euro '96 tournament, and Shearer spent the remainder of his career with the club. While he would never win a trophy at Newcastle, Shearer helped his team to runners-up finishes in the Premier League and FA Cup with Newcastle, and won a second PFA Player of the Year award. After being named England's captain in 1996 and Newcastle's captain in 1999, he retired from international football following Euro 2000, having amassed 63 appearances and 30 goals for his country. As well as his media work, he has raised substantial amounts of money for various national and local charities, both within and outside of sports. Shearer is an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE), a Deputy Lieutenant of Northumberland, a Freeman of Newcastle upon Tyne and an honorary Doctor of Civil Law of Northumbria and Newcastle Universities. Early yearsShearer was born in Gosforth, Newcastle in 1970 to working-class parents Alan and Anne Shearer. His father, a sheet-metal worker, encouraged a keen Shearer to play football in his youth, and the young player continued with the sport as he progressed through school. He was educated at Gosforth Central Middle School and Gosforth High School. Growing up playing on the streets of his hometown, he originally played in midfield because "it meant [he] could get more involved in the games."    Shearer captained his school team and helped a Newcastle City Schools team win a seven-a-side tournament at St James' Park, before joining the amateur Wallsend Boys Club as a teenager. It was while playing for the Wallsend club that he was spotted by Southampton's scout, Jack Hixon, which resulted in Shearer spending his summers training with the club's youth team, a time he would later refer to as "the making of me".  Shearer had successful trials for First Division clubs West Bromwich Albion, Manchester City and Newcastle United, before being offered a youth contract with Southampton in April 1986.  Club career Southampton (1986–1992)Shearer was promoted to the first team after spending two years with the youth squad. He made his professional debut for Southampton on 26 March 1988, coming on as a substitute in a First Division fixture at Chelsea,    before prompting national headlines in his full debut at The Dell two weeks later. He scored a hat-trick, helping the team to a 4–2 victory against Arsenal, thus becoming the youngest player – at 17 years, 240 days – to score a hat-trick in the top division, breaking Jimmy Greaves' 30 year–old record.  Shearer ended the 1987–88 season with three goals in five games, and was rewarded with his first professional contract. Despite this auspicious start to his career, Shearer was only eased into the first team gradually and made just ten goalless appearances for the club the following season. Throughout his career Shearer was recognised for his strength,    which, during his time at Southampton, enabled him to retain the ball and provide opportunities for team mates.  Playing as a lone striker between wide men, Rod Wallace and Matt Le Tissier, Shearer scored three goals in 26 appearances in the 1989–90 season,    and in the next, four goals in 36 games. His performances in the centre of the Saints attack were soon recognised by the fans, who voted him their Player of the Year for 1991.   His partnership with fellow striker Matt Le Tissier would eventually pave the way to international success.  In the summer of 1991, Shearer was a member of the England national under-21 football squad in the Toulon Tournament in Toulon, France. Shearer was the star of the tournament where he scored seven goals in four games.  It was during the 1991–92 season that Shearer rose to national prominence. 13 goals in 41 appearances for the Saints led to an England call-up;    he scored on his debut,    and was strongly linked in the press with a summer move to Manchester United. A possible move for Shearer was being mentioned in the media during late autumn of 1991, but he rejected talk of a transfer (Leeds United were also linked to Shearer)  and vowed to see out the season with Southampton. During the summer of 1992 Southampton's manager, Ian Branfoot, became "the most popular manager in English football", as he took telephone calls from clubs "trying to bargain with players they don't want plus cash". Although Branfoot accepted that a sale was inevitable, he claimed that "whatever happens, we are in the driving seat". Quoted in    Eventually, Shearer was sold to Blackburn Rovers for a fee of £3.6 million, with David Speedie reluctantly moving to The Dell as part of the deal. Despite Branfoot's claim to be "in the driving seat", Saints failed to include a "sell-on clause" in the contract.  In his four years in the Southampton first team, Shearer made a total of 158 appearances in all competitions, scoring 43 goals.  Blackburn Rovers (1992–1996)Despite making just one goalless appearance as England failed to progress past the Euro 1992 group stages that summer,    Shearer was soon subject to a British transfer record-breaking £3.3million  bid from Blackburn Rovers.    Although there was also interest from Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson, Blackburn benefactor Jack Walker's millions were enough to prise the striker from the Saints, and Shearer moved north to Ewood Park in the summer of 1992.   His first season with Blackburn was mixed – he missed half of it through injury after snapping his right anterior cruciate ligament in a match against Leeds United in December 1992, but scored 16 goals in the 21 games in which he did feature.  Shearer also became a regular in the England team this season and scored his second international goal; it came in a 4–0 1994 FIFA World Cup qualifier win over Turkey in November. The season ended sourly, however, as Shearer was forced to miss some games due to injury and England's World Cup qualification chances were hit by a run of poor form. Returning to fitness for the 1993–94 season, he scored 31 goals from 40 games as Blackburn finished runners-up in the Premier League.  His performances for the club led to him being named the Football Writers' Association Footballer of the Year for that season.  On the international scene, England had failed to qualify for the 1994 World Cup finals,  but Shearer added three more goals to his international tally before embarking on his most successful domestic season as a player to date. The arrival of Chris Sutton for the 1994–95 season established a strong attacking partnership at Blackburn. Shearer's league-record 34 goals,         coupled with Sutton's 15, helped the Lancashire club take the Premier League title from holders Manchester United on the final day of the season,  and the duo gained the nickname "the SAS" (Shearer And Sutton).  After being asked by the press how he planned to celebrate winning the title, Shearer replied, by "creosoting the fence".  Shearer also had his first taste of European football in the UEFA Cup that season, and scored in the second leg as Blackburn went out in the first round, losing to Trelleborgs FF of Sweden.  His efforts for the club led to Shearer being awarded the PFA Players' Player of the Year for 1995.   Although the club could not retain the title the following year, Shearer again ended the (now 38-game) season as Premier League top scorer, with 31 goals in 35 games,      as Blackburn finished seventh in the league. The previous season's first-place finish also saw the club enter the Champions League. Shearer's only goal in six full Champions League games was a penalty in a 4–1 victory against Rosenborg in the final fixture  and Blackburn finished third in their group, failing to progress to the next stage. He passed the 100-goal milestone for Blackburn in all competitions on 23 September 1995, scoring a hat-trick in their 5–1 home win over Coventry City in the Premier League. On 30 December, he scored his 100th Premier League goal for the club in a 2–1 home win over Tottenham Hotspur. His final tally for the club was 112 goals in the Premier League and 130 in all competitions. His final goals for the club came on 17 April 1996, when he scored twice in a 3–2 home league win over Wimbledon. Shearer's international strike rate had also dried up, with no goals in the twelve matches leading up to Euro 96.  He missed the final three games of the season for his club due to injury, but recovered in time to play in England's UEFA European Championship campaign. Newcastle United (1996–2006)After Euro 96, Manchester United again sought to sign Shearer, and entered the battle for his signature. Shearer stated he came close to signing for the club after extended talks with manager Alex Ferguson. Eventually both Manchester United and Newcastle United agreed fees with Blackburn Rovers and Shearer was all set to move to Manchester United but then at the last second Kevin Keegan requested one last audience with Shearer and persuaded him that his future lay at St. James Park.  On 30 July 1996, for a world transfer record-breaking £15 million Shearer joined his hometown club and league runners-up Newcastle United, managed by his hero Kevin Keegan.        Shearer made his league debut away at Everton, on 17 August 1996,  and maintained his form during the rest of the season, finishing as Premier League top-scorer for the third consecutive season with 25 goals in 31 Premier League games,      as well as winning another PFA Player of the Year accolade,  despite a groin injury forcing him to miss seven matches. Perhaps his best performance of the season came on 2 February 1997  when Newcastle went into the final 15 minutes of the game 3–1 down at home to Leicester City in the league, only for Shearer to win them the game 4–3 by scoring a late hat-trick. However, the league title still eluded the club, who finished second in the league for a consecutive year, with Keegan walking out mid-way through the season.  Another injury problem; this time an ankle ligament injury sustained in a pre-season match at Goodison Park, restricted Shearer to just two goals in 17 games in the 1997–98 season. His injury was reflected in the club's form, and Newcastle finished just 13th in the League. However, United (now managed by Shearer's old boss at Blackburn, Kenny Dalglish) had a good run in the FA Cup; Shearer scored the winning goal in a semi final victory over Sheffield United as the team reached the final. The team were unable to get on the scoresheet at Wembley, and lost the game 2–0 to Arsenal.   An incident during a game against Leicester City in the league saw Shearer charged with misconduct by the FA,  with media sources claiming that video footage showed him intentionally kicking Neil Lennon in the head following a challenge.  The referee of the game took no action against Shearer, and he was then cleared of all charges by the FA, with Lennon giving evidence in the player's defence.  Former Football Association chief Graham Kelly, who brought the charges against the player, later claimed in his autobiography that Shearer had threatened to withdraw himself from the 1998 World Cup squad if the charges were upheld; a claim strenuously denied by Shearer. An almost injury-free season helped Shearer improve on his previous year's tally in 1998–99, the striker converting 14 goals in 30 league games, but Newcastle finished 13th again, with Ruud Gullit having replaced Kenny Dalglish just after the season got underway.  He also helped Newcastle to a second consecutive FA Cup final and qualification for the following season's UEFA Cup, but they once again lost; this time 2–0 to Treble-chasing Manchester United. Further managerial changes betrayed another lacklustre season in 1999–2000 as unpopular Ruud Gullit resigned to be replaced by the 66-year-old Bobby Robson.  The former's dismissal followed his decision to leave Shearer out of the starting lineup for the club's 2–1 defeat to arch-rivals Sunderland. Despite Gullit giving Shearer the captain's armband, reports of a rift between club captain and manager were rife, Gullit's decision proved deeply unpopular with fans and his departure capped a dismal start to the season.  The animosity between Shearer and Gullit was later confirmed by the latter, who reported telling the striker that he was "...the most overrated player I have ever seen."  Even with Robson in charge, the club struggled to progress beyond mid-table, although Shearer missed only one league game and notched up 23 goals.  Newcastle did reach the FA Cup semi finals, but a third consecutive final was beyond them as they were beaten by Chelsea. This season also saw Shearer sent off for the first time in his career, in the opening match against Aston Villa, after referee Uriah Rennie showed him a second yellow card for excessive use of his elbows. Ironically, Robson had tried to sign Shearer for Barcelona in 1997, making a bid of £20million which would have seen Shearer break the world's transfer fee record for the second time in 12 months. However, then Newcastle manager Kenny Dalglish rejected the offer. Shearer suffered an injury-hit and frustrating season in 2000–01, having retired from international football after the UEFA Euro 2000 tournament in order to focus on club football.  He managed only five goals in 19 games in the league. 2001–02 was much better though; Shearer bagged 23 goals in 37 league games as Newcastle finished fourth—their highest standing since 1997—meaning they would qualify for the following season's Champions League competition.  One of the most memorable incidents of the season saw Roy Keane sent off after a confrontation with Shearer during Newcastle's 4–3 win over the Red Devils in September 2001.   Shearer also saw red for the second time in his career this season, after allegedly elbowing an opposition player in a match against Charlton Athletic. The card was subsequently rescinded by referee Andy D'Urso after reviewing video replays after the game. The 2002–03 season saw Shearer and Newcastle make their return to the UEFA Champions League. Newcastle lost their first three matches in the opening group stage, but Shearer's goal against Dynamo Kiev,  coupled with further wins against Juventus and Feyenoord saw the club progress to the second group stage.  Shearer's hat-trick against Bayer Leverkusen and Brace against Inter in the second group stage helped him reach a total of seven Champions League goals, along with his 17 in 35 games in the league, and a total of 25 for the season as the team again improved to finish in third place in the Premier League. After this, Newcastle would have one more chance to progress in the Champions League in early 2003, but Shearer was one of those who failed to score as the team were eliminated in a penalty shootout by Partizan Belgrade in the third qualifying round. United progressed well in that season's UEFA Cup and Shearer's six goals helped the club reach the semi-finals, where they were beaten by eventual runners up Olympique de Marseille. Domestically he also had a good season, with 22 goals in 37 appearances,    however could not prevent the club dropping out of the Champions League places to finish in fifth, qualifying once again for the UEFA Cup. Announcing that this would be his final season before retirement, Shearer's form in 2004–05 was patchy; alongside new signing Patrick Kluivert, he scored only seven goals in his 28 games as the club finished the season in 14th place.  The club fared better in the cup competitions, however, eventually losing out to Sporting in the Uefa Cup quarter-finals and Manchester United in the FA Cup semi-finals. Shearer scored a hattrick in the first round win against Hapoel Bnei Sakhnin, and ended the season with a haul of 11 European goals, in addition to his one goal in domestic cups. The summer of 2005 saw Shearer reverse his decision to retire after persuasion from then-manager Graeme Souness.  He decided to continue playing in a player-coach capacity until the end of the following season.  and he returned for one more season in 2005–06. This last season saw him break Jackie Milburn's 49-year-old record of 200 goals for Newcastle United (not including his 38 World War II Wartime League goals)  when he netted his 201st strike in a home Premier League fixture against Portsmouth on 4 February 2006, becoming the club's highest-ever league and cup competition goalscorer with 206 goals altogether.  On 17 April 2006, with three games remaining in his final season as a player, Shearer suffered a tear to the medial collateral ligament in his left knee after a collision during the 4–1 win at Sunderland in which he scored his 206th goal in what was his 395th appearance for the club. The injury caused him to miss those final three games, effectively bringing forward his retirement.  Shearer finished his final season with 10 goals in 32 league games.  Tribute and testimonial In tribute to Shearer's contribution to Newcastle United over more than ten years, the club erected a large banner of Shearer on the outside of the cantilever superstructure of the Gallowgate End of St James' Park. The banner measured   high by   wide, covering almost half of the Gallowgate End, aptly placed above the club bar, Shearers bar, opened in his honour in 2005. The banner depicted Shearer as the "Gallowgate Giant", with one arm aloft in his signature goal celebration, with the message "Thanks for 10 great years", and was featured in the media coverage reflecting on his career at the club,     with the banner being displayed from 19 April 2006 until 11 May 2006, the day of his testimonial match. The banner could be seen across the city and as far away as Gateshead across the River Tyne, standing taller than the iconic local landmark, the Angel of the North.Shearer was awarded a testimonial match by the club, against Scottish-side Celtic. All proceeds of the match went to charitable causes. Because of the injury he sustained three games earlier at Sunderland, Shearer was unable to play in the whole match; however he kicked-off the game and came off the bench to score a penalty, winning the game 3–2.  The match was a sell-out, and saw Shearer perform a lap of honour at the end with his family, with his young son notably covering his ears due to the volume of noise produced by the crowd in tribute. International careerShearer's international career began in 1990 when he was handed a callup to the England under-21 squad under Dave Sexton. During his time with the squad, he scored 13 times in 11 games; a record return which is still unbeaten.   The striker's goals at this level, coupled with his club form, meant he was soon promoted to the senior squad by coach Graham Taylor. Marking his debut in the 2–0 win against France in February 1992 with a goal,  he made his only appearance for the England B team a month later. Due to replace Gary Lineker, who retired from international action after Euro 92, in the England attack,    Shearer played only intermittently in the qualifying campaign for the 1994 FIFA World Cup due to injury and the team failed to reach the competition finals.Euro 96 was a more positive experience for both Shearer and England. With England not required to qualify as hosts, Shearer had not scored in 12 games in the 21 months prior,  and even his overall goalscoring record for England did not look too impressive so far; five goals in 23 games.  However, he found the net in the 22nd minute of the first game, against Switzerland.    Scoring once in the following game against Scotland and twice in a 4–1 win over the Netherlands,  Shearer helped England to progress to the next stage in front of their own fans in Wembley.In the quarter finals, England were outplayed by Spain but got through to a penalty shootout after a goalless draw. Shearer scored the first England penalty,  while the Spaniards failed to score from two of theirs, sending England into the semi-final against Germany. Shearer headed England into the lead after three minutes, but the Germans quickly equalised and the match went to penalties again. This time, Germany won from the spot; although Shearer scored, his team-mate Gareth Southgate missed his kick and England were eliminated. Shearer's five goals made him the competition's top scorer,  and together with team mates David Seaman and Steve McManaman, was listed in the official UEFA team of the tournament.The new England manager Glenn Hoddle appointed Shearer squad captain for the 1998 FIFA World Cup qualifier against Moldova on 1 September 1996, and the player held onto the captaincy after scoring once in that match and twice in the following game against Poland. He scored a total of five goals in England's successful qualification campaign for the 1998 FIFA World Cup; adding strikes against Georgia and away to Poland to his tally.  Shearer was sidelined for much of the 1997–98 season,  but recovered to play in the World Cup finals. With Michael Owen replacing Teddy Sheringham as Shearer's strike partner, Shearer's return saw him score England's first goal of the tournament, in a 2–0 win over Tunisia, his only goal in the three group matches.  England faced long-time rivals Argentina in the second round. Shearer scored a first-half equaliser from the penalty-spot before David Beckham was sent off early in the second half. In the final minutes of the game Sol Campbell headed in what could have been the winning goal only for the referee to disallow it due to Shearer having elbowed goalkeeper Carlos Roa. The scores tied 2–2, the game went to penalties. Shearer scored again, but England were eliminated after David Batty's shot was saved by the Argentina goalkeeper.  This defeat ended England's participation in what was to be Shearer's only World Cup tournament. In September 1999, Shearer scored his only England hat-trick in a Euro 2000 qualifier against Luxembourg.  This helped England reach a play-off against Scotland; England won the game over two legs and in doing so qualified for the European Championships. By now, Shearer was approaching his 30th birthday, and he announced that he intended to retire from international football after the Euro 2000 tournament.  Shearer did not score in England's opening 3–2 defeat against Portugal, but did so as England defeated Germany 1–0 in Charleroi,    ensuring that England beat their European neighbours for the first time since the 1966 World Cup Final. To remain in the tournament, England only required a draw against Romania in the final group match, and Shearer scored a penalty as England went in at half-time 2–1 up, but Romania ultimately won 3–2.   England's tournament was over, and so was Shearer's international career. From his 63 caps, he captained the team 34 times and scored thirty goals;  joint-fifth in the England all-time goalscorers list with Nat Lofthouse and Tom Finney.  Shearer remained in international retirement despite speculation of a return during the 2002 World Cup and 2004 European Championship campaigns, and further declined an offer to be assistant manager to Steve McClaren after the 2006 World Cup – a position ultimately filled by Terry Venables.    Style of playAs a player, Shearer was often styled as a classic English centre-forward, owing to his strength, physical stature, heading ability and strong shot.   Of his 206 Newcastle goals, 49 were scored with his head.    Earlier in his career, especially at Southampton, Shearer played a more creative role; providing chances for fellow strikers, and making runs into space, owing to his early development as a midfielder. Later on in his career, Shearer played a more forward role; his age meant that he lost much of the pace which served him on the south coast.  Able to hold the ball up well, he also functioned as a target man, providing balls for other players.  Although his strength allowed him to hold on to the ball, his playing style sometimes brought him criticism; most commonly that his play was too physical, and that he used his elbows too aggressively; it was this which contributed to both of his sendings off, although one was later rescinded on appeal.   As well as the two red cards, Shearer received 59 yellow cards during his career.Shearer was noted as a proficient penalty taker for both club and country,   and he scored 45 times from the spot for Newcastle, where he was the first-choice taker. He also scored 5 goals from free-kicks for the north-east club.  Coaching and management career CoachingOn his retirement as a player Shearer responded to speculation of an immediate move into coaching that he would take some personal time off to "enjoy life" for the next couple of years. He was also quoted as saying that he would eventually like to move into management,  "when the time was right"  however as of March 2009 he was yet to start the UEFA Pro Licence course,.  which is required to be permitted to manage a team in the Premier League and European competition. Reflecting his desire for personal time off to "enjoy life", in July 2006 he turned down a coaching role with England, citing his BBC commitments and desire to be away from the pressure of a job within football.  Despite this, Shearer was often linked in the media with managerial or coaching positions at his three former clubs.  Shearer took a brief role in the dugout for his final three games under Glenn Roeder. Shearer had rejected offers of coaching or assistant roles at Newcastle under both the returning Kevin Keegan in February 2008 and Joe Kinnear in November 2008.       Shearer had previously had talks about, but never been offered, a full-time manager's role at Newcastle until his appointment on 1 April 2009.  Manager – Newcastle UnitedIn a surprise move, late on 1 April 2009, it was announced that Shearer would become the manager of his former club Newcastle United for the remaining eight games of the season, taking over from head coach Chris Hughton who was in temporary charge while the permanent manager Joe Kinnear recovered from heart surgery, having taken ill on 7 February. Shearer stated "It's a club I love and I don't want them to go down. I'll do everything I can to stop that."  Shearer was unveiled at a press conference the following day by club managing director Derek Llambias.    In explaining his acceptance of a managerial role at Newcastle at this time, Shearer stated that he would not have done this for any other club in this position, including his two other previous Premier League clubs.  Amid persistent questioning regarding the permanency of the appointment, Llambias announced that Shearer was to be manager for the remaining eight games, and after his recovery, Joe Kinnear would return as manager in the summer.  Shearer confirmed that the BBC had agreed to giving him an 8 week sabbatical from his Match of the Day role.  Llambias also confirmed Dennis Wise had left his executive role at the club and the club had no plans to appoint a replacement, with Shearer stating that "the people that have moved, were moving on anyways, that had nothing to do with me".  Wise's presence had previously been speculated as being a blockage to any possible appointment of a manager.  Shearer accepted the surprise offer on the Monday on the condition that he could bring in Iain Dowie as his assistant.  Shearer also brought in Paul Ferris to oversee club medical, physio and dietary matters.  Ferris had previously worked with Shearer in his playing days, and had been at the club for 13 years  prior to an earlier departure under then manager Glenn Roeder. His first match in charge ended in a 2–0 defeat against Chelsea at St. James' Park.   On 11 April, Newcastle earned their first point under Shearer with a 1–1 draw with Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium with Andy Carroll scoring a late equalizing goal.  After a defeat to Tottenham Hotspur and a draw against Portsmouth, his first win for Newcastle came in a 3–1 victory over Middlesbrough that lifted Newcastle from the relegation zone. On the eve of the final day of the season on 24 May, where all fixtures are played simultaneously, Newcastle faced the prospect of being relegated to the Championship, along with Hull City, Middlesbrough and Sunderland, which would end their 16 year unbroken spell in the Premier League.  After losing 1–0 at Aston Villa with Damien Duff scoring an own goal, Newcastle were relegated with local rivals Middlesbrough, joining West Bromwich Albion whose relegation had been confirmed in previous weeks, while Sunderland and Hull City survived. Shearer's eight games yielded only five points out of a possible twenty-four.   Shearer did not get the manager's job on permanent basis. Chris Hughton stepped up from the coaching staff to take charge of the quest to get Newcastle back into the Premier League, which was achieved at the first attempt as Newcastle finished top of the Championship in 2009–10.Despite Newcastle looking like good bets for survival with the halfway point of the 2010–11 Premier League campaign looming, Hughton was sacked on 6 December 2010 and this sparked speculation that Shearer would be re-appointed as manager of the club. However, Newcastle's directors said that they were looking for a manager with more top flight experience and Shearer had ruled himself out of the running. Alan Pardew eventually took over the role.   Post Newcastle UnitedOn 14 June 2011, BBC Sport Wales reported the Shearer had held talks with Championship club Cardiff City over the vacant manager job.  Shearer commented the next day that, "unfortunately, those talks were unsuccessful on this occasion."  Career outside football Television career and commercial rolesAfter his retirement and following guest appearances, Shearer became a regular pundit for the BBC's Match of the Day. He also formed part of the team which covered the 2006 World Cup, Euro 2008, 2010 World Cup, and Euro 2012 for the BBC.      Former Newcastle chairman Freddy Shepherd announced that, after Shearer finished the 2005–06 season as Newcastle's caretaker assistant manager, he would become the club's "Sporting Ambassador"  for 2006–07.  However in September 2008 it was reported that Shearer was sacked from this largely honorary position by the club's owner Mike Ashley despite protests from players such as Steven Taylor and Damien Duff, due to Shearer's criticism of the way in which the club was being run in the wake of the departure of Kevin Keegan.  These articles were denied by the club.   Charitable causesDuring his playing days, Shearer had been involved with the children's charity the NSPCC, taking part in the organisation's Full Stop campaign in 1999.  Since retiring from football Shearer has also done work for several charities both nationally and in the Newcastle area.In his testimonial match, he raised £1.64m benefiting fourteen good causes including £400,000 for the NSPCC and £320,000 for completion of the "Alan Shearer Centre", a respite care facility based in West Denton, Newcastle.       In October 2006 he became an ambassador for the NSPCC, describing it as "the kick-off to my most important role yet".    He has also worked with the charity the Dream Foundation.  In 2006, Shearer founded the Alan Shearer Academy Scholarship to aid the development of promising young players in the region. In 2008, he raised over £300,000 for Sport Relief in a bike ride with fellow Match of the Day presenter Adrian Chiles, the idea for which emerged in an off the cuff question from cycling fan Chiles to Shearer as to how he kept fit since retirement.  Shearer also played and scored twice in Soccer Aid, a game involving celebrities and former players at Wembley Stadium in September 2008, to raise money for UNICEF. On 26 July 2009, Shearer played and scored in the Sir Bobby Robson Trophy match, a charity match held at St James' Park in tribute of Sir Bobby Robson and in aid of his cancer charity the Sir Bobby Robson Foundation.    It proved to be Sir Bobby's last public appearance, as he died five days later.    On 15 October 2009 Shearer became the new patron of Sir Bobby's Foundation.    Personal life FamilyShearer is married to Lainya, whom he met whilst a Southampton player. The couple lived locally with her parents during Shearer's second year at the south coast club, and were married on 8 June 1991 at St. James' Church in the city. In contrast to the portrayal of some WAGs (wives and girlfriends) of later players by the media, Lainya is described by Shearer as a quiet and reserved person, not comfortable in the spotlight her husband's fame sometimes brought. The couple have three children.  Shearer cited not wanting to uproot his family as a key reason for remaining in England during his career, having had the chance to move to Juventus or Barcelona when leaving Blackburn.  Shearer's family accompanied him onto the pitch following the striker's testimonial in May 2006 as he performed a lap of honour at St. James' Park.    Personal honoursOn 6 December 2000, Shearer was given Honorary Freedom of the City of Newcastle upon Tyne, with the citation "in recognition of his role as Captain of Newcastle United Football Club and as former Captain of England which have enhanced the reputation of the City".       Shearer was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2001 Queen's Birthday Honours. On 4 December 2006, Shearer was created a Doctor of Civil Law by Northumbria University, at a ceremony at Newcastle City Hall, where the University vice-chancellor declared that "Throughout his career Alan Shearer has been hard-working, committed, disciplined and focused in his endeavours, fighting back from career-threatening injuries with great determination and courage".  On 1 October 2009, Shearer was commissioned as Deputy Lieutenant of Northumberland, having been nominated by the Lord Lieutenant of Northumberland, Jane Percy, Duchess of Northumberland, and approved for the position by The Queen.    In this role, Shearer, along with 21 other deputies, is the stand-in for the Duchess when she cannot fulfill her role as The Queen's official representative in the region at official engagements.    Deputies must live within 7 miles of the county boundaries, and retain their appointment until age 75.  The Duchess said of the appointment that "You could not find a more iconic person than Alan, not just for what he has done in football but for all the extra work he tirelessly does for charity and communities. I am delighted he has accepted the role of Deputy Lieutenant because he is a real role model. I have promised him he is not going to have to do too much, but even if it is just one occasion a year he is the perfect choice"   On 7 December 2009 Shearer was made a Doctor of Civil Law by Newcastle University.        Chancellor Sir Liam Donaldson stated "Newcastle United are my team. Alan Shearer is more than just a local legend, he's probably one of the greatest footballers of all time".   Career statistics Club  |- |1987–88||rowspan="6"|Southampton||rowspan="6"|First Division||5||3||0||0||0||0||colspan="2"|–||5||3 |- |1988–89||10||0||0||0||0||0||colspan="2"|–||10||0 |- |1989–90||26||3||3||0||6||2||colspan="2"|–||35||5 |- |1990–91||36||4||4||2||6||6||colspan="2"|–||48 Includes Full Members Cup ||14  |- |1991–92||41||13||7||2||6||3||colspan="2"|–||60 ||21  |- |Total||118||23||14||4||18||11||0||0||158||43 |- |1992–93||rowspan="5"|Blackburn Rovers||rowspan="5"|Premier League||21||16||0||0||5||6||colspan="2"|–||26||22 |- |1993–94||40||31||4||2||4||1||colspan="2"|–||48||34 |- |1994–95||42||34||2||0||3||2||2||1||49||37 |- |1995–96||35||31||2||0||4||5||6||1||48 Includes Charity Shield ||37  |- |Total||138||112||8||2||16||14||8||2||171||130 |- |1996–97||rowspan="11"|Newcastle United||rowspan="11"|Premier League||31||25||3||1||1||1||4||1||40 ||28 |- |1997–98||17||2||6||5||0||0||colspan="2"|–||23||7 |- |1998–99||30||14||6||5||2||1||2||1||40||21 |- |1999–2000||37||23||6||5||1||0||6||2||50||30 |- |2000–01||19||5||0||0||4||2||colspan="2"|–||23||7 |- |2001–02||37||23||5||2||4||2||colspan="2"|–||46||27 |- |2002–03||35||17||1||1||0||0||12||7||48||25 |- |2003–04||37||22||2||0||1||0||11||6||51||28 |- |2004–05||28||7||4||1||1||0||9||11||42||19 |- |2005–06||32||10||3||1||2||1||4||2||41||14  |- |Total||303||148||36||21||16||7||48||30||404||206  559||283||58||27||50||32||56||32||733||379   National team      |- |1992||6||2 |- |1993||1||0 |- |1994||6||3 |- |1995||8||0 |- |1996||9||8 |- |1997||5||3 |- |1998||11||6 |- |1999||10||6 |- |2000||7||2 |- !Total||63||30 |} International goals  Scores and results list England's goal tally first. "Score" column indicates the score after the player's goal.     #  Date  Venue  Opponent  Score  Result  Competition  1  19 February 1992  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  2–0  Friendly match  2  18 November 1992  Wembley Stadium, London     2–0  4–0  1994 FIFA World Cup Qual.  3  17 May 1994  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  5–0  Friendly match  4  7 September 1994  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  2–0  Friendly match  5  7 September 1994  Wembley Stadium, London     2–0  2–0  Friendly match  6  8 June 1996  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  1–1  UEFA Euro 1996  7  15 June 1996  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  2–0  UEFA Euro 1996  8  18 June 1996  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  4–1  UEFA Euro 1996  9  18 June 1996  Wembley Stadium, London     3–0  4–1  UEFA Euro 1996  10  26 June 1996  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  1–1  UEFA Euro 1996  11  1 September 1996  Stadionul Republican, Chişinău     3–0  3–0  1998 FIFA World Cup Qual.  12  9 October 1996  Wembley Stadium, London     1–1  2–1  1998 FIFA World Cup Qual.  13  9 October 1996  Wembley Stadium, London     2–1  2–1  1998 FIFA World Cup Qual.  14  30 April 1997  Wembley Stadium, London     2–0  2–0  1998 FIFA World Cup Qual.  15  31 May 1997  Stadion Slaski, Chorzów     1–0  2–0  1998 FIFA World Cup Qual.  16  7 June 1997  Stade de la Mosson, Montpellier     1–0  1–0  Tournoi de France  17  22 April 1998  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  3–0  Friendly match  18  22 April 1998  Wembley Stadium, London     3–0  3–0  Friendly match  19  15 June 1998  Stade Vélodrome, Marseille     1–0  2–0  1998 FIFA World Cup  20  30 June 1998  Stade Geoffroy-Guichard, Saint-Étienne     1–1  2–2  1998 FIFA World Cup  21  5 September 1998  Råsundastadion, Stockholm     1–0  1–2  UEFA Euro 2000 Qual.  22  14 October 1998  Stade Josy Barthel, Luxembourg City     2–0  3–0  UEFA Euro 2000 Qual.  23  28 April 1999  Nepstadion, Budapest     1–0  1–1  Friendly match  24  9 June 1999  Balgarska Armia Stadion, Sofia     1–0  1–1  UEFA Euro 2000 Qual.  25  4 September 1999  Wembley Stadium, London     1–0  6–0  UEFA Euro 2000 Qual.  26  4 September 1999  Wembley Stadium, London     2–0  6–0  UEFA Euro 2000 Qual.  27  4 September 1999  Wembley Stadium, London     4–0  6–0  UEFA Euro 2000 Qual.  28  10 October 1999  Stadium of Light, Sunderland     1–0  2–1  Friendly match  29  17 June 2000  Stade du Pays de Charleroi, Charleroi     1–0  1–0  UEFA Euro 2000  30  20 June 2000  Stade du Pays de Charleroi, Charleroi     1–1  2–3  UEFA Euro 2000   Career totals  Professional career totals  Teams Appearances Goals Goals per game  Clubs 733 379 0.52  National team  63  30 0.48  Total 796 409 0.51   Manager  Team Nat From To Record  G W D L Win %  Newcastle United   1 April 2009 24 May 2009     Footballing honours Club and international  Southampton Full Members Cup finalist: 1992    Blackburn Rovers Premier League winner: 1994–95    Newcastle United Premier League runner-up: 1996–97 FA Cup finalist: 1998, 1999 England Tournoi de France: 1997   Individual  Euro 96 Golden Boot Winner (five goals)  UEFA Euro 1996 All-Star Team UEFA Cup top scorer: 2003–04, 2004–05   FIFA World Player of the Year – Bronze award: 1996 Ballon d'Or – Bronze award: 1996 Highest-ever Premier League goalscorer: 260 goals  Premier League Golden Boot: 1994–95, 1995–96, 1996–97 Record for most Premier League goals in a 42-game season (1992–93 to 1994–95): 34  Record for most Premier League goals in a 38-game season (1995 onwards): 31    Most overall goals scored for Newcastle United: 206    Most European goals for Newcastle United: 30  PFA Players' Player of the Year: 1995, 1997 Football Writers' Association Player of the Year: 1994 Premier League Player of the Season: 1994–95 Inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2004.  Named by Pelé as one of the 125 greatest living footballers.  Premier League 10 Seasons Awards (1992–93 to 2001–02)   Domestic and Overall Player of the Decade Domestic and Overall Team of the Decade Outstanding Contribution to the FA Premier League Top Goalscorer (204) Premier League 20 Seasons Awards (1992–93 to 2011–12) Top Goalscorer (260)    Held jointly with Andrew Cole.    Held jointly with Cristiano Ronaldo.  References  External links        Alan Shearer profile at 4thegame.com February 2006 radio interview with the BBC Interview with Alan Shearer at vidFootball.com
Alanis Morissette       Alanis Nadine Morissette (born June 1, 1974) is a Canadian and American   singer-songwriter, guitarist, record producer and actress. She has won 16 Juno Awards and seven Grammy Awards, was nominated for two Golden Globe Awards. Morissette began her career in Canada, and as a teenager recorded two dance-pop albums, Alanis and Now Is the Time, under MCA Records Canada.Her first international album was the rock-influenced Jagged Little Pill, released in 1995. Jagged has sold more than 33 million units globally.      Her following album, Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie, was released in 1998 and was a success as well. Morissette took up producing duties for her subsequent albums, which include Under Rug Swept, So-Called Chaos and Flavors of Entanglement. Her eighth studio album, Havoc and Bright Lights, was released on August 28, 2012. Morissette has sold more than 60 million albums worldwide.    Morissette is also known for her powerful and emotive mezzo-soprano voice.  Early lifeMorissette was born June 1, 1974 in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada,  the daughter of Georgia Mary Ann (née Feuerstein), a teacher, and Alan Richard Morissette, a high school principal.  She has a twin brother, Wade Morissette, (also a musician) who was born 12 minutes after her.  Her father was of French-Canadian and Irish descent and her mother was of Hungarian ancestry.    Morissette had a Catholic upbringing.  She attended Holy Family Catholic School for elementary school  and Immaculata High School for Grades 7 and 8  before completing the rest of her high school at Glebe Collegiate Institute (Ottawa, Canada). She appeared on the children's television show You Can't Do That on Television for five episodes when she was in elementary school.  Music career  1985: First demoMorissette recorded her first demo called "Fate Stay With Me" at Marigold Studios in Toronto, engineered by Rich Dodson of Canadian classic rock band, The Stampeders.  1991–92: Early careerIn 1991 MCA Records Canada released Morissette's debut album, Alanis, in Canada only. Morissette co-wrote every track on the album with its producer, Leslie Howe. By the time it was released, she had dropped her stage name and was credited simply as Alanis. The dance-pop album went platinum, "Search Certification Database". Canadian Recording Industry Association.  and its first single, "Too Hot", reached the top twenty on the RPM singles chart. Subsequent singles "Walk Away" and "Feel Your Love" reached the top 40. Morissette's popularity, style of music and appearance, particularly that of her hair, led her to become known as the Debbie Gibson of Canada; "Transcript: Profiles of Alanis Morissette, Margaret Cho". CNN People in the News. January 4, 2003.  comparisons to Tiffany were also common. During the same period, she was a concert opening act for rapper Vanilla Ice. Farley, Christopher John. "You Oughta Know Her". Time. February 26, 1996.  Morissette was nominated for three 1992 Juno Awards: Most Promising Female Vocalist of the Year (which she won), Single of the Year and Best Dance Recording (both for "Too Hot"). In 1992, she released her second album, Now Is the Time, a ballad-driven record that featured less glitzy production than Alanis and contained more thoughtful lyrics.  Morissette wrote the songs with the album's producer, Leslie Howe, and Serge Côté. She said of the album, "people could go, 'Boo, hiss, hiss, this girl's like another Tiffany or whatever.' But the way I look at it ... people will like your next album if it's a suck-ass one."  As with Alanis, Now Is the Time was released only in Canada and produced three top 40 singles—"An Emotion Away", the minor adult contemporary hit "No Apologies" and "(Change Is) Never a Waste of Time". It was a commercial failure, however, selling only a little more than half the copies of her first album.  Wild, David. "Adventures Of Miss Thing". Rolling Stone. November 2, 1995.  With her two-album deal with MCA Records Canada complete, Morissette was left without a major label contract. 1993–97: Move to Los Angeles and Jagged Little PillIn 1993 Morissette's publisher Leeds Levy at MCA Music Publishing introduced her to manager Scott Welch.    Welch told HitQuarters he was impressed by her "spectacular voice," her character and her lyrics. At the time she was still living at home with her parents. Together they decided it would be best for her career to move to Toronto and start writing with other people.  After graduating from high school, Morissette moved from Ottawa to Toronto.  Her publisher funded part of her development and when she met producer and songwriter Glen Ballard, he believed in her talent enough to let her use his studio.   The two wrote and recorded Morissette's first internationally released album, Jagged Little Pill, and by the spring of 1995, she had signed a deal with Maverick Records. According to manager Welch every label they had approached had passed on Morissette apart from Maverick.   Maverick Records released Jagged Little Pill internationally in 1995. The album was expected only to sell enough for Morissette to make a follow-up, but the situation changed quickly when KROQ-FM, an influential Los Angeles modern rock radio station, began playing "You Oughta Know", the album's first single.    The song instantly garnered attention for its scathing, explicit lyrics,  and a subsequent music video went into heavy rotation on MTV and MuchMusic.After the success of "You Oughta Know", the album's other hit singles helped send Jagged Little Pill to the top of the charts. "All I Really Want" and "Hand In My Pocket" followed, but the fourth U.S. single, "Ironic", became Morissette's biggest hit. "You Learn" and "Head over Feet", the fifth and sixth singles, respectively, kept Jagged Little Pill in the top twenty on the Billboard 200 albums chart for more than a year. According to the RIAA, Jagged Little Pill sold more than 16 million copies in the U.S.; it sold 33 million worldwide,    making it the second biggest selling album by a female artist (behind Shania Twain's Come On Over). Newman, Melinda. "10 Years On, Alanis Unplugs 'Little Pill'"Billboard. March 4, 2005. Retrieved November 16, 2006.  Walker, Steven. "The Sound Of A Decade". The Age Blog. August 24, 2007.  Morissette's popularity grew significantly in Canada, where the album was certified twelve times platinum  and produced four RPM chart-toppers: "Hand In My Pocket", "Ironic", "You Learn", and "Head over Feet". The album was also a bestseller in Australia and the United Kingdom.  Morissette's success with Jagged Little Pill was credited with leading to the introduction of female singers such as Shakira, Tracy Bonham, Meredith Brooks, Patti Rothberg and, in the early 2000s, Pink and fellow Canadian Avril Lavigne.  She was criticized for collaborating with producer and supposed image-maker Ballard, and her previous albums also proved a hindrance for her respectability.  Hannaham, James. "Alanis In Wonderland". Spin. November 2, 1995.  Morissette and the album won six Juno Awards in 1996: Album of the Year, Single of the Year ("You Oughta Know"), Female Vocalist of the Year, Songwriter of the Year and Best Rock Album.  At the 1996 Grammy Awards, she won Best Female Rock Vocal Performance, Best Rock Song (both for "You Oughta Know"), Best Rock Album and Album of the Year. Later in 1996, Morissette embarked on an 18-month world tour in support of Jagged Little Pill, beginning in small clubs and ending in large venues. Taylor Hawkins, who later joined the Foo Fighters, was the tour's drummer. "Ironic" was nominated for two 1997 Grammy Awards—Record of the Year and Best Music Video, Short Form —and won Single of the Year at the 1997 Juno Awards, where Morissette also won Songwriter of the Year and the International Achievement Award.  The video Jagged Little Pill, Live, which was co-directed by Morissette and chronicled the bulk of her tour, won a 1998 Grammy Award for Best Music Video, Long Form. Following the stressful tour, Morissette started practicing Iyengar Yoga for balancing, and after the last December 1996 show, she headed to India for six weeks, accompanied by her mother, two aunts and two female friends.  She has an older brother named Chad and a younger twin brother born 12 minutes after her. 1998–2000: Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie and Alanis Unplugged Morissette was featured as a guest vocalist on Ringo Starr's cover of "Drift Away" on his 1998 album, Vertical Man, and on the songs "Don't Drink the Water" and "Spoon" on the Dave Matthews Band album Before These Crowded Streets. She recorded the song "Uninvited" for the soundtrack to the 1998 film City of Angels. Although the track was never commercially released as a single, it received widespread radio airplay in the U.S. At the 1999 Grammy Awards, it won in the categories of Best Rock Song and Best Female Rock Vocal Performance, and was nominated for Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media.  Later in 1998, Morissette released her fourth album, Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie, which she wrote and produced with Glen Ballard.Privately, the label hoped to sell a million copies of the album on initial release;  instead, it debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart with first-week sales of 469,000 copies—a record, at the time, for the highest first-week sales of an album by a female artist.  The wordy, personal lyrics on Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie alienated many fans, and after the album sold considerably less than Jagged Little Pill, many labelled it an example of the sophomore jinx.   However, it received positive reviews, including a four-star review from Rolling Stone.  In Canada, it won the Juno Award for Best Album and was certified four times platinum.  "2000 30th Juno Awards". Los Angeles Times.  "Thank U", the album's only major international hit single, was nominated for the 2000 Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance; the music video, which featured Morissette nude, generated mild controversy. Willman, Chris. "The Second Coming of Alanis". Entertainment Weekly. November 6, 1998, iss. 457.   Morissette herself directed the videos for "Unsent" and "So Pure", which won, respectively, the MuchMusic Video Award for Best Director and the Juno Award for Video of the Year.   The "So Pure" video features actor Dash Mihok, with whom Morissette was in a relationship at the time. Morissette contributed vocals to "Mercy", "Hope", "Innocence", and "Faith", four tracks on Jonathan Elias's project The Prayer Cycle, which was released in 1999. The same year, she released the live acoustic album Alanis Unplugged, which was recorded during her appearance on the television show MTV Unplugged. It featured tracks from her previous two albums alongside four new songs, including "King of Pain" (a cover of The Police song) and "No Pressure over Cappuccino", which Morissette wrote with her main guitar player, Nick Lashley. The recording of the Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie track "That I Would Be Good", released as a single, became a minor hit on hot adult contemporary radio in America. Also in 1999, Morissette released a live version of her song "Are You Still Mad" on the charity album Live in the X Lounge II. For her live rendition of "So Pure" at Woodstock '99, she was nominated for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance at the 2001 Grammy Awards.  During summer 1999, Alanis toured with singer/songwriter Tori Amos on the 5 And A Half Weeks Tour in support of Amos' album To Venus And Back. 2001–03: Under Rug Swept and Feast on ScrapsIn 2001, Morissette was featured with Stephanie McKay on the Tricky song "Excess", which is on his album Blowback. Morissette released her fifth studio album, Under Rug Swept, in February 2002. For the first time in her career, she took on the role of sole writer and producer of an album. Her band, comprising Joel Shearer, Nick Lashley, Chris Chaney, and Gary Novak, played the majority of the instruments; additional contributions came from Eric Avery, Dean DeLeo, Flea, and Meshell Ndegeocello.Under Rug Swept debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart, eventually going platinum in Canada and selling one million copies in the U.S.     It produced the hit single "Hands Clean", which topped the Canadian Singles Chart and received substantial radio play; for her work on "Hands Clean" and "So Unsexy", Morissette won a Juno Award for Producer of the Year.  A second single, "Precious Illusions", was released, but it did not garner significant success outside Canada or U.S. hot AC radio.Later in 2002, Morissette released the combination package Feast on Scraps, which includes a DVD of live concert and backstage documentary footage directed by her and a CD containing eight previously unreleased songs from the Under Rug Swept recording sessions. Preceded by the single "Simple Together", it sold roughly 70,000 copies in the U.S. and was nominated for a Juno Award for Music DVD of the Year.   2004–05: So-Called Chaos, Jagged Little Pill Acoustic and The Collection  Morissette hosted the Juno Awards of 2004 dressed in a bathrobe, which she took off to reveal a flesh-colored bodysuit, a response to the era of censorship in the U.S. caused by Janet Jackson's breast-reveal incident during the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show.  Morissette released her sixth studio album, So-Called Chaos, in May 2004. She wrote the songs on her own again, and co-produced the album with Tim Thorney and pop music producer John Shanks. The album debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 chart to generally mixed critical reviews, and it became Morissette's lowest seller in the U.S.  The lead single, "Everything", achieved major success on adult top 40 radio in America and was moderately popular elsewhere, particularly in Canada, although it failed to reach the top 40 on the U.S. Hot 100. Because the first line of the song includes the word asshole, American radio stations refused to play it, and the single version was changed to include the word nightmare instead. "Morissette laughs off her display of 'nudity'". Canadian Press via CTV Television Network. April 7, 2004.  Two other singles, "Out Is Through" and "Eight Easy Steps", fared considerably worse commercially than "Everything", although a dance mix of "Eight Easy Steps" was a U.S. club hit.Morissette embarked on a U.S. summer tour with long-time friends and fellow Canadians Barenaked Ladies, working with the non-profit environmental organization Reverb. To commemorate the tenth anniversary of Jagged Little Pill, Morissette released a studio acoustic version, Jagged Little Pill Acoustic, in June 2005. The album was released exclusively through Starbucks' Hear Music retail concept through their coffee shops for a six-week run. The limited availability led to a dispute between Maverick Records and HMV North America, who retaliated by removing Morissette's other albums from sale for the duration of Starbucks's exclusive six-week sale.   As of November 2010, Jagged Little Pill Acoustic had sold 372,000 copies in the U.S.,  and a video for "Hand in My Pocket" received rotation on VH1 in America. The accompanying tour ran for two months in mid 2005, with Morissette playing small theatre venues. During the same period, Morissette was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame. "Alanis Morissette – 2005 Inductee". Canada's Walk of Fame. Morissette opened for The Rolling Stones for a few dates of their A Bigger Bang Tour in the autumn of 2005.Morissette released the greatest hits album Alanis Morissette: The Collection in late 2005. The lead single and only new track, a cover of Seal's "Crazy", was a U.S. adult top 40 and dance hit, but it achieved only minimal chart success elsewhere. A limited edition of The Collection features a DVD including a documentary with videos of two unreleased songs from Morissette's 1996 Can't Not Tour: "King of Intimidation" and "Can't Not". (A reworked version of "Can't Not" had also appeared on Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie.) The DVD also includes a ninety-second clip of the unreleased video for the single "Joining You". As of November 2010, The Collection had sold 373,000 copies in the U.S., according to Soundscan. Morissette contributed the song "Wunderkind" to the soundtrack of the film The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, and it was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song. Baltin, Steve. "Alanis Writing Memoir, Album". Rolling Stone. January 13, 2006. Alanis performed two songs with Avril Lavigne: Morissette's "Ironic" and Lavigne's "Losing Grip". 2006–10: Flavors of Entanglement and leaving Maverick Records 2006 marked the first year in Morissette's musical career without a single concert appearance showcasing her own songs, with the exception of an appearance on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in January when she performed "Wunderkind".On April 1, 2007, Morissette released a tongue-in-cheek cover of The Black Eyed Peas's selection "My Humps", which she recorded in a slow, mournful voice, accompanied only by a piano. The accompanying YouTube-hosted video, in which she dances provocatively with a group of men and hits the ones who attempt to touch her "lady lumps", had received 16,465,653 views on February 15, 2009. The Celebrity Truth. "PLW Live – Alanis Morisette Finally Explains My Humps". Undercover.com.au. June 7, 2008.  Morissette did not take any interviews for a time to explain the song, and it was theorized that she did it as an April Fools' Day joke. Saxberg, Lynn. "Bloggers, 'Tubers all atwitter over Morissette's video parody of the Peas". The Ottawa Citizen. April 5, 2007.  Black Eyed Peas vocalist Stacy "Fergie" Ferguson responded by sending Morissette a buttocks-shaped cake with an approving note.  On the verge of the release of her latest album, she finally elaborated on how the video came to be, citing that she became very much emotionally loaded while recording her new songs one after the other and one day she wished she could do a simple song like "My Humps" in a conversation with Guy Sigsworth and the joke just took a life of its own when they started working on it. Morissette performed at a gig for The Nightwatchman, a.k.a. Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave fame, at the Hotel Café in Los Angeles in April 2007. The following June, she performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" and "O Canada", the American and Canadian national anthems, in Game 4 of the Stanley Cup Finals between the Ottawa Senators and the Anaheim Ducks in Ottawa, Ontario. "Alanis Morissette to sing national anthems at Game 4 of Stanley Cup final". Canadian Press via Maclean's. June 1, 2007.  (The NHL requires arenas to perform both the American and Canadian national anthems at games involving teams from both countries.) In early 2008, Morissette participated in a tour with Matchbox Twenty and Mutemath as a special guest.Morissette's seventh studio album, Flavors of Entanglement, which was produced by Guy Sigsworth, was released in mid 2008. She has stated that in late 2008, she would embark on a North American headlining tour, but in the meantime she would be promoting the album internationally by performing at shows and festivals and making television and radio appearances. The album's first single was "Underneath", a video for which was submitted to the 2007 Elevate Film Festival, the purpose of which festival was to create documentaries, music videos, narratives and shorts regarding subjects to raise the level of human consciousness on the earth. "Official Elevate Film Festival Website". September 15, 2007.  On October 3, 2008, Morissette released the video for her latest single, "Not as We". Recently, Morissette has contributed to 1 Giant Leap, performing "Arrival" with Zap Mama and she has released an acoustic version of her song "Still" as part of a compilation from Music for Relief in support of the 2010 Haiti earthquake crisis. Morissette has also recorded a cover of the 1984 Willie Nelson and Julio Iglesias hit, "To All the Girls I've Loved Before", re-written as "To All the Boys I've Loved Before".    Nelson played rhythm guitar on the recording. In April 2010, Morissette released the song "I Remain", which she wrote for the Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time soundtrack.On May 26, 2010, the season finale of American Idol, Morissette performed a duet of her song "You Oughta Know" with Runner Up Crystal Bowersox. Morissette left Maverick Records after all promotion for Flavors was completed. 2011–present: Havoc and Bright Lights and upcoming 2012 tourOn October 11, 2011, Morissette posted a picture of herself in a recording studio to her Facebook page. The picture included the message "back in the studio saddle....the songs have come in droves...!", indicating that Morissette had begun work on her next album. However, it was unknown if she would be still associated with Maverick Records, after the completion of her last album Flavors of Entanglement. On November 20, 2011, Morissette appeared at the American Music Awards. When asked about the new album during a short interview, she said she had recorded thirty-one songs, and that the album would "likely be out next year, probably [in] summertime". On December 21, 2011, Morissette performed a duet of "Uninvited" with finalist Josh Krajcik during the performance finale of the X-Factor.Morissette is embarking on a European tour for the Summer of 2012, according to Alanis.com. In early May 2012, a new song called "Magical Child" appeared on a Starbucks compilation called Every Mother Counts. Rolling Stone Magazine initially reported that Morissette's new album would be released in June 2012 and revealed the titles of four album tracks: "Spiral," "Guardian," "Celebrity," and "Havoc." "Spiral" and "Guardian" were performed at Guitar Center sessions.   "Havoc" is a ballad, while  "Celebrity" is described to be "a scathing takedown of America's obsession with fame." On May 2, 2012, Morissette revealed through her Facebook account that her eighth studio album, entitled Havoc and Bright Lights, would be released in August 2012, on new label "Collective Sound", distributed by Sony's RED Distribution.  On the same day, Billboard specified the date as August 28 and revealed the album would contain twelve tracks. The album's lead single, "Guardian", was released on iTunes on May 15, 2012, and hit the radio airwaves four days prior to this.    Acting careerIn 1986, Morissette had her first stint as an actor: five episodes of the children's television show You Can't Do That on Television. She appeared on stage with the Orpheus Musical Theatre Society in 1985 and 1988. In 1999, Morissette delved into acting again, for the first time since 1993, appearing as God in the Kevin Smith comedy Dogma and contributing the song "Still" to its soundtrack. Morissette reprised her role as God for a post-credits scene in Smith's next film, Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, to literally close the book on the View Askewniverse. She also appeared in the hit HBO comedies Sex and the City and Curb Your Enthusiasm, appeared in the play The Vagina Monologues, and had a brief role in the Brazilian hit soap opera "Celebridade" (Celebrity).In late 2003, Morissette appeared in the Off-Broadway play The Exonerated as Sunny Jacobs, a death row inmate freed after proof surfaced that she was innocent. In April 2006, MTV News reported that Morissette would reprise her role in The Exonerated in London from May 23 until May 28. She expanded her acting credentials with the July 2004 release of the Cole Porter biographical film De-Lovely, in which she performed the song "Let's Do It (Let's Fall in Love)" and had a brief role as an anonymous stage performer. In February 2005, she made a guest appearance on the Canadian television show Degrassi: The Next Generation with Dogma co-star Jason Mewes and director Kevin Smith.In 2006, she guest starred in an episode of Lifetime's Lovespring International as a homeless woman named Lucinda, three episodes of FX's Nip/Tuck, playing a lesbian named Poppy, and the mockumentary/documentary Pittsburgh as herself.Morissette has appeared in eight episodes of Weeds, playing Dr. Audra Kitson, a "no-nonsense obstetrician" who treats pregnant main character Nancy Botwin.  Her first episode aired in July 2009.  In early 2010 Morissette returned to the stage, performing a one night engagement in An Oak Tree, an experimental play in Los Angeles. The performance was a sell out. In April 2010 Morissette was confirmed in the cast of Weeds season six, performing again her role as Dr. Audra Kitson. Morissette also starred in a film adaptation of Philip K. Dick's novel Radio Free Albemuth. Morissette plays Sylvia, an ordinary woman in unexpected remission from lymphoma. Morissette stated that she is "...a big fan of Philip K. Dick's poetic and expansively imaginative books" and that she "feel[s] blessed to portray Sylvia, and to be part of this story being told in film". She appeared as Amanda, a former bandmate of main character Ava Alexander, in one episode of NBC's Up All Night   on February 16, 2012. Rudolph officiated as minister for Morissette's wedding with both performing the explicit version of their hit hip-hop song, "Back It Up (Beep Beep)". Personal lifeMorissette was raised in a devout Roman Catholic family, and now practices Buddhism.  She dated actor and comedian Dave Coulier for a short time in the early 1990s.  In a 2008 interview with the Calgary Herald, Coulier claimed to be the ex-boyfriend who inspired Morissette's song "You Oughta Know".    Morissette, however, has maintained her silence on the subject of the song. Morissette met Canadian actor Ryan Reynolds at Drew Barrymore's birthday party in 2002, and the couple began dating soon after.  They announced their engagement in June 2004.    In February 2007, representatives for Morissette and Reynolds announced they had mutually decided to end their engagement.    Morissette has stated that her album Flavors of Entanglement was created out of her grief after the break-up, saying that "it was cathartic". Morissette became a US citizen in 2005, while maintaining her Canadian citizenship.   On May 22, 2010, Morissette married rapper Mario “MC Souleye” Treadway (born May 3, 1980 in Boston, Massachusetts) in a private ceremony at their Los Angeles home.  Their first child, Ever Imre Morissette-Treadway, was born on December 25, 2010. Morissette is a vegan  and an active environmentalist.  In 2009, she was nominated as PETA's World's Sexiest Vegetarians.  Discography   Alanis (1991) Now Is the Time (1992) Jagged Little Pill (1995) Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie (1998) Under Rug Swept (2002) So-Called Chaos (2004) Flavors of Entanglement (2008) Havoc and Bright Lights (2012)   Filmography  Film Year Title Role Notes  1999 Dogma God   2001 Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back God cameo  2004 De-Lovely unnamed singer sang "Let's Do It, Let's Fall in Love"  2005 Fuck herself documentary  2005 Just Friends herself deleted scene  2010 Radio Free Albemuth Sylvie   2012 As Cool As I Am herself     Television Year Title Role Notes  1986 Malhação Herself Brazilian soap opera  1986 You Can't Do That on Television Herself   2000 Sex and the City Dawn episode "Boy, Girl, Boy, Girl"  2002 Curb Your Enthusiasm Herself episode "The Terrorist Attack"  2003 Celebridade Herself Brazilian soap opera  2004 American Dreams Singer in the Lair episode "What Dreams May Come"  2005 Degrassi: The Next Generation Principal episode "Goin' Down the Road: Part 1"  2006 Lovespring International Lucinda   2006 Nip/Tuck Poppy 3 episodes  2009–2010 Weeds Dr. Audra Kitson Recurring; 8 episodes   2012 Up All Night Amanda episode "Travel Day"   Stage Year Title Role  1999 The Vagina Monologues   2004 The Exonerated Sunny Jacobs  2010 An Oak Tree    Tours  1991: Vanilla Ice tour (opening act) 1995: Jagged Little Pill/Intellectual Intercourse Tour 1996: Can't Not Tour 1998: Club Tour (Alanis Morissette tour) 1999: Junkie Tour 1999: Junkie Tour Australian Leg (with Garbage) 1999: 5 ½ Weeks Tour (with Tori Amos) 2000: One Tour 2001: Under Rug Swept Tour 2002: Toward Our Union Mended Tour 2003: All I Really Want/Feast on Scraps Tour 2004: So-Called Chaos/Au Naturale Tour (with Barenaked Ladies) 2005: Diamond Wink Tour 2008: Exile in America (with Matchbox Twenty and Mutemath) 2008: Flavors of Entanglement Tour 2012: The Guardian Angel Tour   Awards and nominations  See also     Canadian rock Music of Canada Best selling music artists List of diamond-certified albums in Canada List of best-selling albums worldwide List of best-selling music artists   References  Further reading   Rock on the Net "Alanis Morissette – Artist Chart History". Billboard. Retrieved August 23, 2006. [  "Alanis Morissette – Billboard Singles"]. Allmusic. Retrieved August 23, 2006. "Alanis Morissette". Mariah-charts.com. Retrieved August 23, 2006. Rock Chicks:The Hottest Female Rockers from the 1960s to Now by Stieven-Taylor, Alison (2007). Sydney. Rockpool Publishing. ISBN 978-1-921295-06-5   External links         Alanis Morissette's Jagged Little Pill Review at  Spectrum FM
Alastair Reynolds  Alastair Preston Reynolds (born 1966) is a British science fiction author. He specialises in dark hard science fiction and space opera. He spent his early years in Cornwall, moved back to Wales before going to Newcastle, where he read physics and astronomy. Afterwards, he earned a PhD from St Andrews, Scotland. In 1991, he moved to Noordwijk in the Netherlands where he met his wife Josette (who is from France). There, he worked for the European Space Research and Technology Centre, part of the European Space Agency, until 2004 when he left to pursue writing full time.   He returned to Wales in 2008 and lives near Cardiff. Works Reynolds wrote his first four published science fiction short stories while still a graduate student, in 1989-1991; they appeared in 1990-1992, his first sale being to Interzone.   In 1991 Reynolds graduated and moved from Scotland to the Netherlands to work at ESA. He then started spending much of his writing time on a first novel, which eventually turned into Revelation Space, while the few short stories he submitted from 1991-1995 were rejected. This ended in 1995 when his story "Byrd Land Six" was published, which he says marked the beginning of a more serious phase of writing.   he has published over forty shorter works and nine novels. His works are hard science fiction veiled behind space opera and noir toned stories, and reflect his professional expertise with physics and astronomy, included by extrapolating future technologies in terms that are consistent, for the most part, with current science. Reynolds has said he prefers to keep the science in his books to what he personally believes will be possible, and he does not believe faster-than-light travel will ever be possible, but that he adopts science he believes will be impossible when it is necessary for the story.  Most of Reynolds's novels contain multiple storylines that originally appear to be completely unrelated, but merge later in the story.Five of his novels and several of his short stories take place within one consistent future universe, usually now called the Revelation Space universe after the first novel published in it, although it was originally developed in short stories for several years before the first novel. Although most characters appear in more than one novel, the works set within this future timeline rarely have the same protagonists twice. Often the protagonists from one work belong to a group that is regarded with suspicion or enmity by the protagonists of another work. While a great deal of science fiction reflects either very optimistic or dystopian visions of the human future, Reynolds's future worlds are notable in that human societies have not departed to either positive or negative extremes, but instead are similar to those of today in terms of moral ambiguity and a mixture of cruelty and decency, corruption and opportunity, despite their technology being dramatically advanced.The Revelation Space series includes five novels, two novellas, and eight short stories set over a span of several centuries, spanning approximately 2200 to 40 000, although the novels are all set in a 300 year period spanning from 2427 to 2727. In this universe, extraterrestrial sentience exists but is elusive, and interstellar travel is primarily undertaken by a class of vessel called a lighthugger which only approaches the speed of light (faster than light travel is possible, but it is so dangerous that no race uses it). Fermi's paradox is explained as resulting from the activities of an inorganic alien race referred to by its victims as the Inhibitors, which exterminates sentient races if they proceed above a certain level of technology. The trilogy consisting of Revelation Space, Redemption Ark and Absolution Gap (the Inhibitor trilogy)  deal with humanity coming to the attention of the inhibitors and the resultant war between them.Century Rain takes place in a future universe independent of the Revelation Space universe and has different rules, such as faster-than-light travel being possible through a system of portals similar to wormholes. Century Rain also departs substantially from Reynolds's previous works, both in having a protagonist who is much closer to the perspective of our real world (in fact he is from a version of our past), serving as a proxy for the reader in confronting the unfamiliarity of the advanced science fiction aspects and in having a much more linear storytelling process. Reynolds's previous protagonists started out fully absorbed in the exoticisms of the future setting and his previous Revelation Space works have several interlinked story threads, not necessarily contemporaneous. According to Alastair himself, no sequel will ever be made on Century Rain. www.alastairreynolds.com, as retrieved in  . Pushing Ice is also a standalone story, with characters from much less distant in the future than in any of his other novels, set into a framework storyline that extends much further into the future of humanity than any of his previous novels.  It contains an alternative interpretation of the Fermi paradox: intelligent sentient life in this universe is extremely scarce.The Prefect marked a return to the Revelation Space universe. Like Chasm City, it is a stand-alone novel within the Revelation Space universe. It is set prior to any of the other Revelation Space novels, though still 200 years after the original human settlement of the Epsilon Eridani system. It was published in the United Kingdom on 2 April 2007.House of Suns is a standalone novel set in the same universe as his novella "Thousandth Night" from the One Million A.D. anthology.  It was released in the UK on 17 April 2008 and in the US on 2 June 2009.  Reynolds described it as "Six million years in the future, starfaring clones, tensions between human and robot metacivilisations, King Crimson jokes." Terminal World, published in March 2010 was described by Reynolds as "a kind of steampunk-tinged planetary romance, set in the distant future".  As with Century Rain, Reynolds has said that he does not plan any further work in the universe of Terminal World. In June 2009 Reynolds signed a new deal, worth £1 million, with his British publishers for ten books to be published over the next ten years.  His current project is Poseidon's Children (previously known by Reynolds working title, the 11k series), a hard science fiction trilogy dealing with the expansion of the human species into the solar system and beyond, and the emergence of Africa as a spacefaring, technological super-state several centuries down the line over the next 11,000 years.   The first book is titled Blue Remembered Earth. He is also currently writing a Doctor Who novel named Harvest of Time.  Awards and nominations Reynolds's fiction has received three awards and several other nominations. His second novel Chasm City won the 2001 British Science Fiction Award for Best Novel.  His short story "Weather" won the Japanese National Science Fiction Convention's Seiun Award for Best Translated Short Fiction.  His novels Absolution Gap and The Prefect have also been nominated for previous BSFA awards.        Reynolds has been nominated for the Arthur C. Clarke Award three times, for his novels Revelation Space,  Pushing Ice  and House of Suns.  In 2010, he won the Sidewise Award for Alternate History for his short story "The Fixation".    His novella Troika made the shortlist  for the 2011 Hugo Awards.     Bibliography  Novels  Revelation Space  Revelation Space. London: Gollancz, 2000. ISBN 0-575-06875-2 Chasm City. London: Gollancz, 2001. ISBN 0-575-06877-9 Redemption Ark. London: Gollancz, 2002. ISBN 0-575-06879-5 Absolution Gap. London: Gollancz, 2003. ISBN 0-575-07434-5 The Prefect. London: Gollancz, 2007, ISBN 0-575-07716-6   Poseidon's Children  Blue Remembered Earth, London: Gollancz, 2012, ISBN 0-575-08827-3 On The Steel Breeze,  London: Gollancz, 2013, ISBN 0-575-09045-6 TBA, London: Gollancz, TBA   Other  Century Rain. London: Gollancz, 2004. ISBN 0-575-07436-1 Pushing Ice. London: Gollancz, 2005. ISBN 0-575-07438-8 House of Suns. London: Gollancz, 2008, ISBN 0-575-07717-4 Terminal World, London: Gollancz, 2010, ISBN 0-575-07718-8     Collections  Diamond Dogs, Turquoise Days. London: Gollancz, 2003. ISBN 0-575-07526-0 Zima Blue and Other Stories. San Francisco, CA: Night Shade Books, 2006. ISBN 1-59780-058-9 (Contains nearly all of the author's non-Revelation Space universe stories at the time of publication.) Zima Blue and Other Stories. London: Gollancz, 2009. ISBN 0-575-08405-6   (British edition with three stories not included in the original publication. Introduction by Paul McAuley.) Galactic North. London: Gollancz, 2006. ISBN 0-575-07910-X (Contains all novellas and short stories in the Revelation Space universe up to 2006, except those in Diamond Dogs, Turquoise Days) Deep Navigation. Framingham, MA: NESFA Press, 2010. ISBN 978-1-886778-90-0 (Limited edition containing stories either not included in, or published after the earlier collections. Introduction by Stephen Baxter.)   Novellas  Revelation Space   "Great Wall of Mars" - Originally published in Spectrum SF #1 (February 2000); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Eighteenth Annual Collection (2001, ISBN 0-312-27465-3), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Galactic North "Glacial" - Originally published in Spectrum SF #5 (March 2001); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Nineteenth Annual Collection (2002, ISBN 0-312-28879-4), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Year's Best SF 7 (2002, ISBN 0-06-106143-3), David G. Hartwell & Kathryn Cramer, eds.; and in Galactic North Diamond Dogs - Originally published as a chapbook from PS Publishing (2001, ISBN 1-902880-27-7); reprinted in Infinities (2002), Peter Crowther, ed.; and in Diamond Dogs, Turquoise Days Turquoise Days - Originally published as a chapbook from Golden Gryphon (2002, no ISBN); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twentieth Annual Collection (2003, ISBN 0-312-30860-4), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Best of the Best Volume 2: 20 Years of the Year's Best Short Science Fiction Novels (2007, ISBN 0-312-36342-7), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Diamond Dogs, Turquoise Days "Weather" - Originally published in Galactic North (2006) "Grafenwalder's Bestiary" - Originally published in Galactic North (2006) "Nightingale" - Originally published in Galactic North (2006); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Fourth Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 978-0-312-36335-2), Gardner Dozois, ed.   Other   "Thousandth Night" - Originally published in One Million A.D. (2005), Gardner Dozois, ed. "Understanding Space and Time" - Originally published in a limited edition of 400 copies for the Novacon 35 Sci Fi convention; reprinted in Science Fiction: The Best of the Year, 2006 Edition (2006, ISBN 978-0-8095-5649-6), Rich Horton, ed.; and in Science Fiction: The Very Best of 2005 (2006), Jonathan Strahan, ed.; and in Zima Blue and Other Stories "Minla's Flowers" - Originally published in The New Space Opera (2007, ISBN 978-0-06-084675-6), Gardner Dozois and Jonathan Strahan, eds. "The Six Directions of Space" - Originally published in Galactic Empires (September 2007 ), Gardner Dozois, ed.; to be reprinted as a stand-alone chapbook by Subterranean Press  "Troika": originally published in Godlike Machines (2010), Jonathan Strahan, ed.    Short fiction  Revelation Space   "Dilation Sleep" - Originally published in Interzone #39 (September 1990); reprinted in Galactic North "A Spy in Europa" - Originally published in Interzone #120 (June 1997); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Fifteenth Annual Collection (1998, ISBN 0-312-19033-6), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Galactic North; and posted free online at Infinity Plus   North" - Originally published in Interzone #145 (July 1999); reprinted in Space Soldiers (2001, ISBN 978-0-441-00824-7), Jack Dann and Gardner Dozois, eds.; and in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Seventeenth Annual Collection (2000, ISBN 0-312-26417-8), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Hayakawa's SF magazine; and in Galactic North "Monkey Suit" – Originally published in Death Ray #20 (July 2009); reprinted in Deep Navigation   Other   "Nunivak Snowflakes" - Originally published in Interzone #36 (June 1990); reprinted in Deep Navigation, Limited Edition "Enola" - Originally published in Interzone #54 (December 1991); reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories "Digital to Analogue" - Originally published in In Dreams (1992), Paul McAuley and Kim Newman, eds.; reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories, Limited Edition "Byrd Land Six" - Originally published in Interzone #96 (June 1995); reprinted in The Ant Men of Tibet and Other Stories (2001, ISBN 1-903468-02-7), David Pringle, ed. "Spirey and the Queen" - Originally published in Interzone #108 (June 1996); reprinted in Future War (1999, ISBN 0-441-00639-6), Gardner Dozois and Jack Dann, eds.; and in Zima Blue and Other Stories; and in The Space Opera Renaissance (2006), David G. Hartwell & Kathryn Cramer, eds.; and posted free online at Infinity Plus   the Oodnadatta" - Originally published in Interzone #128 (February 1998) "Stroboscopic" - Originally published in Interzone #134 (August 1998); reprinted in Dangerous Games (2007, ISBN 978-0-441-01490-3), Gardner Dozois and Jack Dann, eds. "Angels of Ashes" - Originally published in Asimov's Science Fiction (July 1999); reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories "Viper" - Originally published in Asimov's Science Fiction (December 1999) "Merlin's Gun" - Originally published in Asimov's Science Fiction (May 2000); reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories; and in The Mammoth Book of Extreme Science Fiction (2006, ISBN 978-0-7867-1727-9), Mike Ashley, ed. "Hideaway" - Originally published in Interzone #157 (July 2000); reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories "Fresco" - Originally published in the UNESCO Courier (May 2001) "The Big Hello" - Originally published in German translation in a convention program "The Real Story" - Originally published in Mars Probes (2002), Peter Crowther, ed.; reprinted in Zima Blue and Other Stories "Everlasting" - Originally published in Interzone #193 (Spring 2004) "Beyond the Aquila Rift" - Originally published in Constellations (2005), Peter Crowther, ed.; reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Third Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 0-312-35334-0), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Year's Best SF 11 (2006, ISBN 978-0-06-087341-7), David G. Hartwell and Kathryn Cramer, eds.; and in Zima Blue and Other Stories "Zima Blue" - Originally published in Postscripts # 4 (Summer 2005); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Third Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 0-312-35334-0), Gardner Dozois, ed.; and in Zima Blue and Other Stories "Feeling Rejected" - Originally published in the journal Nature (2005) "Tiger, Burning" - Originally published in Forbidden Planets (2006, ISBN 0-7564-0330-8), Peter Crowther, ed.; reprinted in Year's Best SF 12 (2007, ISBN 978-0-06-125208-2), David G. Hartwell and Kathryn Cramer, eds. "Signal to Noise" - Originally published in Zima Blue and Other Stories, (2006); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Fourth Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 978-0-312-36335-2), Gardner Dozois, ed. "The Sledge-Maker's Daughter" - Originally published in Interzone No. 209 (April 2007); reprinted in The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Fifth Annual Collection (2006, ISBN 978-0-312-37860-8), Gardner Dozois, ed. "The Star-Surgeon's Apprentice" - Originally published in The Starry Rift (April 2008), Jonathan Strahan, ed. "Fury"- Originally published in Eclipse Two: New Science Fiction and Fantasy, (November 2008). "The Manastodon Broadcasts" - Originally published in Aberrant Dreams I: The Awakening (December 2008), Joe Dickerson, Ernest G. Saylor and Lonny Harper, eds. "Scales" - Originally published in The Guardian (2009); and posted free online at Lightspeed Magazine   Fixation - Originally published in a Finnish language, Hannun basaarissa a limited edition booklet of about 200 copies in tribute to Hannu Blommila in Finland (2007); to be reprinted in The Solaris Book of New Science Fiction, Volume 3 (February 2009), George Mann, ed. "The Receivers" - Originally published in Other Earths (April 2009), Nick Gevers and Jay Lake, eds. "Sleepover" - Originally published in The Mammoth Book of Apocalyptic SF (May 2010), Mike Ashley, eds.   See also   Night Shade Books Revelation Space universe   References  External links  Personal homepage Personal Blog, Approaching Pavonis Mons by balloon   Alastair Reynolds' online fiction at Free Speculative Fiction Online Golden Gryphon Press official site - About chapbook Turquoise Days   Interviews  Interview conducted by Roger Deforest (2006) Science fiction 'thrives in hi-tech world', interview by the BBC (2007)
Albert Abraham Michelson    Albert Abraham Michelson (December 19, 1852 – May 9, 1931) was an American physicist known for his work on the measurement of the speed of light and especially for the Michelson-Morley experiment. In 1907 he received the Nobel Prize in Physics. He became the first American to receive the Nobel Prize in sciences. BiographyMichelson was born in Strzelno, Provinz Posen in the Kingdom of Prussia (now Poland) into a Jewish family.  He moved to the US with his parents in 1855, at the age of two. He grew up in the mining towns of Murphy's Camp, California and Virginia City, Nevada, where his father was a merchant. Despite his family being Jewish by birth, his family were non-religious. Throughout Michelson's life, he was a lifelong agnostic.    He spent his high school years in San Francisco in the home of his aunt, Henriette Levy (née Michelson), who was the mother of author Harriet Lane Levy. Levy, 920 O'Farrell Street, 47. President Ulysses S. Grant awarded Michelson a special appointment to the U.S. Naval Academy in 1869.  During his four years as a midshipman at the Academy, Michelson excelled in optics, heat, climatology and drawing. After graduating in 1873 and two years at sea, he returned to the Naval Academy in 1875 to become an instructor in physics and chemistry until 1879. In 1879, he was posted to the Nautical Almanac Office, Washington (part of the United States Naval Observatory   ), to work with Simon Newcomb. In the following year he obtained leave of absence to continue his studies in Europe. He visited the Universities of Berlin and Heidelberg, and the Collège de France and École Polytechnique in Paris. Michelson was fascinated with the sciences, and the problem of measuring the speed of light in particular. While at Annapolis, he conducted his first experiments of the speed of light, as part of a class demonstration in 1877. His Annapolis experiment was refined, and in 1879, he measured the speed of light in air to be 299,864±51 kilometres per second, and estimated the speed of light in vacuum as 299,940 km/s, or 186,380 mi/s.    After two years of studies in Europe, he resigned from the Navy in 1881. In 1883 he accepted a position as professor of physics at the Case School of Applied Science in Cleveland, Ohio and concentrated on developing an improved interferometer. In 1887 he and Edward Morley carried out the famous Michelson-Morley experiment which seemed to rule out the existence of the aether. He later moved on to use astronomical interferometers in the measurement of stellar diameters and in measuring the separations of binary stars.In 1889 Michelson became a professor at Clark University at Worcester, Massachusetts and in 1892 was appointed professor and the first head of the department of physics at the newly organized University of Chicago. In 1899, he married Edna Stanton. They raised one son and three daughters.In 1907, Michelson had the honor of being the first American to receive a Nobel Prize in Physics "for his optical precision instruments and the spectroscopic and metrological investigations carried out with their aid".  He also won the Copley Medal in 1907, the Henry Draper Medal in 1916 and the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1923.  A crater on the Moon is named after him.Michelson died in Pasadena, California at the age of 78. The University of Chicago Residence Halls remembered Michelson and his achievements by dedicating 'Michelson House' in his honor. Case Western Reserve has dedicated a Michelson House to him, and the chemistry academic building at the United States Naval Academy also bears his name. Clark University named a theatre after him.  Michelson Laboratory at Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake in Ridgecrest, California is named for him. There is a display in the publicly accessible area of the Lab which includes facsimiles of Michelson's Nobel Prize medal, the prize document, and examples of his diffraction gratings. Speed of light  Early measurementsAs early as 1877, while still serving as an officer in the United States Navy, Michelson started planning a refinement of the rotating-mirror method of Léon Foucault for measuring the speed of light, using improved optics and a longer baseline. He conducted some preliminary measurements using largely improvised equipment in 1878, about the same time that his work came to the attention of Simon Newcomb, director of the Nautical Almanac Office who was already advanced in planning his own study. Michelson published his result of 299,910±50 km/s in 1879 before joining Newcomb in Washington DC to assist with his measurements there. Thus began a long professional collaboration and friendship between the two.Simon Newcomb, with his more adequately funded project, obtained a value of 299,860±30 km/s, just at the extreme edge of consistency with Michelson's. Michelson continued to "refine" his method and in 1883 published a measurement of 299,853±60 km/s, rather closer to that of his mentor. Mount Wilson and Lookout MountainIn 1906, a novel electrical method was used by E. B. Rosa and N. E. Dorsey of the National Bureau of Standards to obtain a value for the speed of light of 299,781±10 km/s. Though this result has subsequently been shown to be severely biased by the poor electrical standards in use at the time, it seems to have set a fashion for rather lower measured values.From 1920, Michelson started planning a definitive measurement from the Mount Wilson Observatory, using a baseline to Lookout Mountain, a prominent bump on the south ridge of Mount San Antonio (Old Baldy), some 22 miles distant.In 1922, the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey began two years of painstaking measurement of the baseline using the recently available invar tapes. With the baseline length established in 1924, measurements were carried out over the next two years to obtain the published value of 299,796±4 km/s. Famous as the measurement is, it was beset by problems, not least of which was the haze created by the smoke from forest fires which blurred the mirror image. It is also probable that the intensively detailed work of the geodetic survey, with an estimated error of less than one part in 1 million, was compromised by a shift in the baseline arising from the Santa Barbara earthquake of June 29, 1925, which was an estimated magnitude of 6.3 on the Richter scale.The now-famous Michelson-Morley Experiment also influenced the affirmation attempts of peer Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity and special relativity, using similar optical instrumentation. These instruments and related collaborations included the participations of fellow physicists Dayton Miller, Hendrik Lorentz, and Robert Shankland. Michelson, Pease & PearsonThe period after 1927 marked the advent of new measurements of the speed of light using novel electro-optic devices, all substantially lower than Michelson's 1926 value. Michelson sought another measurement, but this time in an evacuated tube to avoid difficulties in interpreting the image owing to atmospheric effects. In 1930, he began a collaboration with Francis G. Pease and Fred Pearson to perform a measurement in a 1.6 km tube at Pasadena, California. Michelson died with only 36 of the 233 measurement series completed and the experiment was subsequently beset by geological instability and condensation problems before the result of 299,774±11 km/s, consistent with the prevailing electro-optic values, was published posthumously in 1935. InterferometryIn 1887 he collaborated with colleague Edward Williams Morley of Western Reserve College, now part of Case Western Reserve University, in the Michelson-Morley experiment. Their experiment for the expected motion of the Earth relative to the aether, the hypothetical medium in which light was supposed to travel, resulted in a null result. Surprised, Michelson repeated the experiment with greater and greater precision over the next years, but continued to find no ability to measure the aether. The Michelson-Morley results were immensely influential in the physics community, leading Hendrik Lorentz to devise his now-famous Lorentz contraction equations as a means of explaining the null result. There has been some historical controversy over whether Albert Einstein was aware of the Michelson-Morley results when he developed his theory of special relativity, which pronounced the aether to be "superfluous". Regardless of Einstein's specific knowledge, the experiment is today considered the canonical experiment in regards to showing the lack of a detectable aether.   Astronomical interferometryFrom 1920 and into 1921 Michelson and Francis G. Pease became the first individuals to measure the diameter of a star other than the Sun. They used an astronomical interferometer at the Mount Wilson Observatory to measure the diameter of the super-giant star Betelgeuse. A periscope arrangement was used to obtain a densified pupil in the interferometer, a method later investigated in detail by Antoine Émile Henry Labeyrie for use in "Hypertelescopes". The measurement of stellar diameters and the separations of binary stars took up an increasing amount of Michelson's life after this.A century later, the specific interferometer instrumentation design produced by Albert Michelson has become the principle means to conduct astronomical interferometry. The "Michelson Interferometer" design is found on modern operational observatories such as VLTI, CHARA – and the U.S. Navy's NPOI. Michelson in popular cultureIn an episode of the television series Bonanza (Look to the Stars, broadcast March 18, 1962), Ben Cartwright (Lorne Greene) helps the 16-year-old Albert Abraham Michelson (portrayed by 25-year-old Douglas Lambert (1936–1986)) obtain an appointment to the U.S. Naval Academy, despite the opposition of the bigoted town schoolteacher (played by William Schallert).  Bonanza was set in and around Virginia City, Nevada, where Michelson lived with his parents prior to leaving for the Naval Academy.  In a voice-over at the end of the episode, Greene mentions Michelson's 1907 Nobel Prize.The home in which Michelson lived as a child in Murphys Camp, California is now a tasting room for Twisted Oak Winery.New Beast Theater Works in collaboration with High Concept Laboratories produced a "semi-opera" about Michelson, his obsessive work style and its effect on his family life which ran from February 11 to February 26, 2011 in Chicago at The Building Stage. Michelson was portrayed by Jon Stutzman. The play was directed by Davaid Maral with music composed by Joshua Dumas. Honors and awards  Nobel Prize for Physics (1907) Rumford Prize (1888) Matteucci Medal (1903) Copley Medal (1907) Elliott Cresson Medal (1912) Henry Draper Medal from the National Academy of Sciences (1916)    Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1923) Franklin Medal (1923)  Michelson was a member of the Royal Society, the National Academy of Sciences, the American Physical Society  and the American Association for the Advancement of Science.The Computer Measurement Group gives an annual A. A. Michelson Award. See also    List of Jewish Nobel laureates List of Naval Academy Nobel Laureates   Notes      References        External links  Albert Abraham Michelson National Academy of Science Michelson's Life and Works from the American Institute of Physics U.S. Naval Academy and The Navy USNA Guide to the Albert A. Michelson Collection, 1803–1989 From USNA to Nobel: Albert A. Michelson's Life and Contributions Michelson House at the University of Chicago Michelson's Nobel Prize Biography   Experimental Determination of the Velocity of Light IMDB: Bonanza episode Look to the Stars Norman Maclean: "Billiards Is a Good Game": Gamesmanship and America’s First Nobel Prize Scientist; reprinted in Lapham's Quarterly The U.S. Naval Academy Observatory Programs and Times Gone By: A Tale of Two Domes NAWS China Lake   Nineteenth Century Astronomy at the U.S. Naval Academy
Albert I of Belgium     Albert I (April 8, 1875 – February 17, 1934) reigned as King of the Belgians from 1909 through 1934. This was a crucial period in the History of Belgium since it included the period of World War I (1914 - 1918) when 99 percent of Belgium was overrun, occupied, and ruled by the German Empire. Other crucial events included the adoption of the Treaty of Versailles, the ruling of the Belgian Congo as an overseas possession of the Kingdom of Belgium, the reconstruction of Belgium following the war, and the first five years of the Great Depression (1929 - 1934). King Albert was killed in a mountaineering accident in eastern Belgium in 1934, at the age of just 58, and he was succeeded by his son Leopold. Early life  Born Albert Léopold Clément Marie Meinrad (in German Albrecht Leopold Clemens Marie Meinrad) in Brussels, he was the fifth child and second son of Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders, and his wife, Princess Marie of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. Prince Philippe was the third (second surviving) son of Leopold I, the first King of the Belgians, and his wife, Marie-Louise of France, and the younger brother of King Leopold II of Belgium. Princess Marie was a relative of Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, and a member of the non-reigning, Catholic branch of the Hohenzollern family. Albert grew up in the Palace of Flanders, initially as fourth in the line of succession to the Belgian throne. When, however, the only legitimate son of his uncle, Leopold II, died as a child, and Albert's older brother, Prince Baudouin of Belgium, who had been subsequently prepared for the throne, also died young, Albert, at the age of 16, unexpectedly became second in line (after his father) to the Belgian Crown.Retiring and studious, Albert prepared himself strenuously for the task of kingship. In his youth, Albert was seriously concerned with the situation of the working classes in Belgium, and personally traveled around working class districts incognito, to observe the living conditions of the people. Carlo Bronne. Albert 1er: le roi sans terre.  Shortly before his accession to the throne in 1909, Albert undertook an extensive tour of the Belgian Congo, which had been annexed by Belgium in 1908 (after having been previously owned by King Leopold II of Belgium as his personal property), finding the area in poor condition. Upon his return to Belgium, he recommended reforms to protect the native population and to further technological progress in the colony. Evelyn Graham. Albert, King of the Belgians. He was the 1,152nd Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece in Austria and the 851st Knight of the Order of the Garter in 1914. MarriageAlbert was married in Munich on 2 October 1900 to Duchess Elisabeth Gabrielle Valérie Marie in Bavaria, a Wittelsbach princess whom he had met at a family funeral. A daughter of Karl-Theodor, Duke in Bavaria, and his wife, the Infanta Maria Josepha of Portugal, she was born at Possenhofen Castle, Bavaria, Germany, on 25 July 1876, and died on 23 November 1965. Based on the letters written during their engagement and marriage (cited extensively in the memoirs of their daughter, Marie-José) the young couple appear to have been deeply in love. The letters express a deep mutual affection based on a rare affinity of spirit. Luciano Regolo. La regina incompresa: tutto il racconto della vita di Maria José di Savoia.  They also make clear that Albert and Elisabeth continually supported and encouraged each other in their challenging and difficult roles as King and Queen. The spouses shared an intense commitment to their country and family and a keen interest in human progress of all kinds. Together, they cultivated the friendship of prominent scientists, artists, mathematicians, musicians, and philosophers, turning their court at Laeken into a kind of cultural salon.  Marie-José, Queen, Consort of Umberto II, King of Italy. Albert et Elisabeth de Belgique, mes parents.  ChildrenAlbert and Elisabeth had three children:  Léopold Philippe Charles Albert Meinrad Hubertus Marie Miguel, Duke of Brabant, Prince of Belgium, who became later the fourth king of the Belgians as Leopold III (born 3 November 1901, and died at Woluwe-Saint-Lambert on 25 September 1983).    Charles-Théodore Henri Antoine Meinrad, Count of Flanders, Prince of Belgium, Regent of Belgium (born Brussels 10 October 1903, and died at Ostend on 1 June 1983).    Marie-José Charlotte Sophie Amélie Henriette Gabrielle, Princess of Belgium (born Ostend 4 August 1906 – 27 January 2001). She was married at Rome, Italy on 8 January 1930 to Prince Umberto Nicola Tommaso Giovanni Maria, Prince of Piemonte (born 15 September 1904 and died on 18 March 1983 at Geneva, Switzerland). He became King Umberto II of Italy.   Succession to the Throne Following the death of his uncle, Leopold II, Albert succeeded to the Belgian throne in December 1909, since Albert's own father had already died in 1905. Previous Belgian kings had taken the royal accession oath only in French; Albert innovated by taking it in Dutch as well.  He and his wife, Queen Elisabeth, were popular in Belgium due to their simple, unassuming lifestyle and their harmonious family life, which stood in marked contrast to the aloof, autocratic manner and the irregular private life of Leopold II. An important aspect of the early years of Albert's reign was his institution of many reforms in the administration of the Belgian Congo, Belgium's only colonial possession. Roger Keyes. Outrageous Fortune: The Tragedy of Leopold III of the Belgians.  ReligionKing Albert was a devout Catholic.  Charles d'Ydewalle. Albert and the Belgians: Portrait of a King.  Jo Gérard. Albert 1er, insolite: 1934-1984.  Many stories illustrate his deep and tender piety. For instance, when his former tutor, General De Grunne, in his old age, entered the Benedictine monastery of Maredsous, Belgium, King Albert wrote a letter to him, in which he spoke of the joy of giving oneself to God.  He said: "May you spend many years at Maredsous in the supreme comfort of soul that is given, to natures touched by grace, by faith in God's infinite power and confidence in His goodness".  To another friend, a Chinese diplomat, who became a Catholic monk, Albert wrote: "Consecrating oneself wholly to the service of Our Lord gives, to those touched by grace, the peace of soul which is the supreme happiness here below".  Albert used to tell his children: "As you nourish your body, so you should nourish your soul."  In an interesting meditation on what he viewed as the harm which would result if Christian ideals were abandoned in Belgium, he said: "Every time society has distanced itself from the Gospel, which preached humility, fraternity, and peace, the people have been unhappy, because the pagan civilization of ancient Rome, which they wanted to replace it with, is based only on pride and the abuse of force" (Commemorative speech for the war dead of the Battle of the Yser, given by Dom Marie-Albert, Abbot of Orval Abbey, Belgium, in 1936 ). World War IAt the beginning of World War I, Albert complied with a British demand that he not acquiesce to a  German request to move troops through Belgium in order to attack Britain's ally,  France, which Germany anticipated was about to declare war on Germany in support of Russia; Britain was the guarantor of Belgian neutrality under an 1839 treaty. King Albert refused passage of the Kaiser's soldiers through his nation.  When Germany subsequently invaded Belgium, King Albert, as prescribed by the Belgian constitution, took personal command of the Belgian army, and held the Germans off long enough for Britain and France to prepare for the Battle of the Marne (6–9 September 1914). He led his army through the Siege of Antwerp and the Battle of the Yser, when the Belgian army was driven back to a last, tiny strip of Belgian territory, near the North Sea. Here the Belgians, in collaboration with the armies of the Triple Entente, took up a war of position, in the trenches behind the River Yser, remaining there for the next four years. During this period, King Albert fought with his troops and shared their dangers, while his wife, Queen Elisabeth, worked as a nurse at the front. The King also allowed his 14-year-old son, Prince Leopold, to enlist in the Belgian army as a private and fight in the ranks.    The war inflicted great suffering on Belgium, which was subjected to a harsh German occupation. The King, fearing the destructive results of the war for Belgium and Europe and appalled by the huge casualty rates, worked through secret diplomatic channels for a negotiated peace between Germany and the Entente based on the "no victors, no vanquished" concept. He considered that such a resolution to the conflict would best protect the interests of Belgium and the future peace and stability of Europe. Since, however, neither Germany nor the Entente were favorable to the idea, tending, instead to seek total victory, Albert's attempts to further a negotiated peace were unsuccessful. In view of his disapproval of the breadth of Allied war aims, King Albert may have considered concluding a separate peace with Germany, if Belgium's independence could be assured and the country safely extricated from the war. Germany's attitude, however, made this impossible, since Germany was using Belgium as a lever to exert pressure on the Entente, and hence was unwilling to restore its independence (Thielemans). At the end of the war, as commander of the Army Group Flanders, consisting of Belgian, British and French divisions, Albert led the final offensive of the war that liberated occupied Belgium. King Albert, Queen Elisabeth, and their children then re-entered Brussels to a hero's welcome. Post-War yearsUpon his return to Brussels, King Albert made a speech in which he outlined the reforms he desired to see implemented in Belgium, including universal suffrage and the establishment of a Flemish University in Ghent. Postwar trip to the United StatesFrom September 23 through November 13, 1919, King Albert, Queen Elisabeth of Bavaria, and their son Prince Leopold took an official visit to the United States. During a visit of the historic Indian pueblo of Isleta Pueblo, New Mexico, King Albert decorated father Anton Docher with the Order of Léopold  who offered the King a turquoise cross mounted in silver made by the Tiwas Indians.  10,000 people traveled to Isleta for this occasion.  Introduction of universal suffrage In 1918, King Albert forged a post-war "Government of National Union" made up of members of the three main parties in Belgium, the Catholics, the Liberals, and the Socialists.   Albert I remembered the Belgian general strike of 1913, and the promise following that of a Constitutional reform for an actual one man, one vote universal suffrage.On April 18, 1893, at the end of the Belgian general strike of 1893, universal suffrage, approved by the Belgian Parliament, gave plural votes to individuals based on their wealth, education, and age, but this was clearly not a universal suffrage ).  The King Albert attempted to mediate between the parties in favor of universal suffrage, or those opposed to it, in order to bring about one man one vote universal suffrage. King Albert succeeded in this.  Some people have named this the "conspiracy of Loppem" because the one man, one vote suffrage was effected without changing the Constitution of Belgium. Paris Peace Conference King Albert attended the Paris Peace Conference, where he defended the interests of Belgium, insisting on war reparations to enable his devastated country to be restored economically, but also opposed a policy of excessive humiliation of defeated Germany. Albert feared that such a policy would only provoke German revenge and lead to future wars in Europe. Vincent Dujardin, Mark van den Wijngaert, et al. Léopold III  He also considered that the dethronement of the princes of Central Europe and, in particular, the dissolution of the Habsburg Empire would constitute a serious menace to peace and stability on the continent.  His views, however, did not prevail in the decisions of the Peace Conference. Albert spent much of the remainder of his reign assisting in the post-war reconstruction of Belgium. Albert was a committed conservationist and in 1925, influenced by the ideas of Carl E. Akeley, he founded Africa's first national park, now known as Virunga National Park, in what is now Democratic Republic of Congo. During this period he was also the first European monarch to visit the United States.  DeathA passionate alpinist, King Albert I died in a mountaineering accident while climbing alone on the Roche du Vieux Bon Dieu at Marche-les-Dames, in the Ardennes region of Belgium near Namur. His death shocked the world and he was deeply mourned, both in Belgium and abroad. Because King Albert was an expert climber, some questioned the official version of his death. Nonetheless, rumors of murder have been dismissed by most historians. There are two possible explanations for his death: the first was he leaned against a boulder at the top of the mountain which became dislodged; or two, the pinnacle to which his rope was belayed had broken, causing him to fall about sixty feet.  King Albert is interred in the Royal Crypt at the Church of Our Lady of Laeken in Brussels. In 1935, prominent Belgian author Emile Cammaerts published a widely acclaimed biography of King Albert I, titled "Albert of Belgium: Defender of Right." In 1993, a close climbing companion of the King, Walter Amstutz, founded the King Albert I Memorial Foundation, an association based in Switzerland and dedicated to honoring distinguished individuals in the mountaineering world. Celebrating 175 years of Belgian Dynasty and the 100th anniversary of his accession,  Albert I was recently selected as the main motif of a high-value collectors' coin: the Belgian 12.5 euro Albert I commemorative coin, minted in 2008. The obverse shows a portrait of the King. Honours and awardsAlbert was Grand Master of several Belgian Orders: Order of Leopold (also Grand Cross decorated with Grand Cordon), Order of the African Star, Royal Order of the Lion, Order of the Crown and Order of Leopold II.He was also the recipient of foreign awards:  Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece Supreme Knight of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Italy Knight Grand Cross of the Military Order of Savoy Knight of the Order of the Black Eagle Knight of the Order of the Garter (United Kingdom) Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (United Kingdom) Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order (United Kingdom) Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Tower and Sword (Portugal) Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav (Norway) Knight of the Order of St. Andrew (Russia) Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St. Stanislaus Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Alexander Nevsky Knight First Class of the Order of St. Anna Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the White Eagle (Poland) Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Virtuti Militari (Poland) Knight First Class of the Order of the Three Stars (Latvia) Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Liberator (Venezuela) Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the White Lion (Czechoslovakia) Knight of Honour and Devotion of the Sovereign Military Hospitaller Order of Malta Bailiff Grand Cross of the Venerable Order of St. John Distinguished Service Medal Military Cross (United Kingdom)   See also  Kings of Belgium family tree Crown Council of Belgium Royal Trust   Ancestry  Albert's ancestors in three generations Albert I of Belgium  Father: Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders Paternal Grandfather: Leopold I of Belgium Paternal Great-grandfather: Francis, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld  Paternal Great-grandmother: Countess Augusta Reuss of Ebersdorf  Paternal Grandmother: Louise of Orléans Paternal Great-grandfather: Louis Philippe I  Paternal Great-grandmother: Maria Amalia of Naples and Sicily  Mother: Princess Marie of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen Maternal Grandfather: Charles Anthony, Prince of Hohenzollern Maternal Great-grandfather: Charles, Prince of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen  Maternal Great-grandmother: Marie Antoinette Murat  Maternal Grandmother: Princess Josephine of Baden Maternal Great-grandfather: Charles, Grand Duke of Baden  Maternal Great-grandmother: Stéphanie de Beauharnais   ArmsOn his birth, Albert was granted a coat of arms. These were those of the king, differenced by a label gules, with one crescent argent on the central point. When his father died in 1905, the crescent was removed. When he acceded as King, he gained the royal arms (Belgium with inescutcheon of the shield of Saxony), undifferenced. Finally, after the abolition of monarchy in Germany and the subsequent loss of his saxonian titles, Albert had the inescutcheon removed in 1921. References   Catherine Barjansky. Portraits with Backgrounds. Marie-Rose Thielemans. Le roi Albert au travers de ses lettres inédites. Marie-Rose Thielemans. Albert 1er: Carnets et correspondances de guerre. Mary Elizabeth Thomas, "Anglo-Belgian Military Relations and the Congo Question, 1911-1913," Journal of Modern History, Vol. 25, No. 2 (June 1953), pp. 157–165.   Further reading       External links     Official biography from the Belgian Royal Family website Information about King Albert's mountaineering feats Belgium in the First World War, including stories of the royal couple, in French Royal House of Belgium Royal House of Bavaria
Albert Ludwigs Universitat Freiburg
Albert Ludwigs University of Freiburg
Alberto Mercado   Alberto Mercado (born January 2, 1961 in Cayey, Puerto Rico) was a Jr. Featherweight boxer who was on the verge of fighting for a world title at least twice in his career.Mercado was one of only three American citizens who challenged the boycott of the 1980 Olympics celebrated in Moscow, Russia, competing in boxing for Puerto Rico after having won the gold medal at the 1979 Pan American Games. The other two were also representants from Puerto Rico and boxers: Luis Pizarro and José Angel Molina. In the professional ranks Mercado had a winning record, but also had some bad luck. He lost to John Montes in a United States title try on points, and on a fight to decide the IBF's #1 challenger, he lost by a knockout in 7 rounds to eventual world champion Antonio Rivera, after leading the fight on all scorecards at the end of round 6.Mercado worked as a fireman in Dade County, Florida for many years. He is a native of Caguas, Puerto Rico, who used to train at the famous Bairoa Gym, but he resided in Cayey during his years as a top boxing contender.He had a professional record of 31 wins, 14 losses and 1 draw (tie), with 27 wins by knockout. See also  List of famous Puerto Ricans   Mercado is currently working at the University of Puerto Rico at Cayey. References  sports-reference
Alcibiades     Alcibiades, son of Clinias, from the deme of Scambonidae ( ;  Greek:  , transliterated Alkibiádēs Kleiníou Skambōnidēs; c. 450–404 BC), was a prominent Athenian  , orator, and general. He was the last famous member of his mother's aristocratic family, the Alcmaeonidae, which fell from prominence after the Peloponnesian War. He played a major role in the second half of that conflict as a strategic advisor, military commander, and politician.During the course of the Peloponnesian War, Alcibiades changed his political allegiance on several occasions. In his native Athens in the early 410s BC, he advocated an aggressive foreign policy, and was a prominent proponent of the Sicilian Expedition, but fled to Sparta after his political enemies brought charges of sacrilege against him. In Sparta, he served as a strategic adviser, proposing or supervising several major campaigns against Athens. In Sparta too, however, Alcibiades soon made powerful enemies and was forced to defect to Persia. There he served as an adviser to the satrap Tissaphernes until his Athenian political allies brought about his recall. He then served as an Athenian General (Strategos) for several years, but his enemies eventually succeeded in exiling him a second time.The Sicilian Expedition was Alcibiades' idea, and scholars have argued that, had that expedition been under Alcibiades' command instead of Nicias', the expedition might not have met its eventual disastrous fate. A. Vlachos, Thucydides' Bias, 59 &c.  In the years that he served Sparta, Alcibiades played a significant role in Athens' undoing; the capture of Decelea and the revolts of several critical Athenian subjects occurred either at his suggestion or under his supervision. Once restored to his native city, however, he played a crucial role in a string of Athenian victories that eventually brought Sparta to seek a peace with Athens. He favored unconventional tactics, frequently winning cities over by treachery or negotiation rather than by siege. P.B. Kern, Ancient Siege Warfare, 151.  Alcibiades' military and political talents frequently proved valuable to whichever state currently held his allegiance, but his propensity for making powerful enemies ensured that he never remained in one place for long; and, by the end of the war he had helped rekindle in the early 410s, his days of political relevance were a bygone memory. Early years Alcibiades was born in ancient Athens, the son of Cleinias and Deinomache. His mother was the daughter of Megacles, and could trace her family back to Eurysaces and the Telamonian Ajax. Plato, Alcibiades 1, 121a.  Alcibiades thereby, through his mother, belonged to the powerful and controversial family of the Alcmaeonidae; the renowned Pericles and his brother Ariphron were Deinomache's cousins, as her father and their mother were siblings. C.A. Cox, Household Interests, 144.  His maternal grandfather, also named Alcibiades, was a friend of Cleisthenes, the famous constitutional reformer of the late 6th century BC.    After the death of Cleinias at the Battle of Coronea (447 BC), Pericles and Ariphron became his guardians. N. Denyer, Commentary of Plato's Alcibiades, 88–89.  According to Plutarch, Alcibiades had several famous teachers, including Socrates, and was well trained in the art of Rhetoric.  He was noted, however, for his unruly behavior, which was mentioned by ancient Greek and Latin writers on several occasions. Alcibiades took part in the Battle of Potidaea in 432 BC, where Socrates was said to have saved his life Plato, Symposium, 220e.  and again at the Battle of Delium in 424 BC.  Alcibiades had a particularly close relationship with Socrates, whom he admired and respected. I. Sykoutris, Introduction to Symposium, 159–180.  Plato, Symposium, 215a–222b.  According to Plutarch, Alcibiades "feared and reverenced Socrates alone, and despised the rest of his lovers". Plutarch, Alcibiades, 6. Alcibiades was married to Hipparete, the daughter of Hipponicus, a wealthy Athenian. According to Plutarch, Hipparete loved her husband, but she attempted to divorce him because he consorted with courtesans. She lived with him until her death and gave birth to two children, a daughter and a son, Alcibiades the Younger. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 8.  Political career until 412 BC Rise to prominenceAlcibiades first rose to prominence when he began advocating aggressive Athenian action after the signing of the Peace of Nicias. That treaty, an uneasy truce between Sparta and Athens signed midway through the Peloponnesian War, came at the end of seven years of fighting during which neither side had gained a decisive advantage. Historians Arnold W. Gomme and Raphael Sealey believe, and Thucydides reports, Thucydides, "The History of the Peloponnesian Wars", 5.43.  that Alcibiades was offended that the Spartans had negotiated that treaty through Nicias and Laches, overlooking him on account of his youth. A.W. Gomme, A Historical Commentary on Thucydides, 339.  R. Sealey, A History of the Greek City States, 353. Disputes over the interpretation of the treaty led the Spartans to dispatch ambassadors to Athens with full powers to arrange all unsettled matters. The Athenians initially received these ambassadors well, but Alcibiades met with them in secret before they were to speak to the ecclesia (the Athenian Assembly) and told them that the Assembly was haughty and had great ambitions. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 14.  He urged them to renounce their diplomatic authority to represent Sparta, and instead allow him to assist them through his influence in Athenian politics.  The representatives agreed and, impressed with Alcibiades, they alienated themselves from Nicias, who genuinely wanted to reach an agreement with the Spartans.  The next day, during the Assembly, Alcibiades asked them what powers Sparta had granted them to negotiate and they replied, as agreed, that they had not come with full and independent powers. This was in direct contradiction to what they had said the day before, and Alcibiades seized on this opportunity to denounce their character, cast suspicion on their aims, and destroy their credibility. This ploy increased Alcibiades' standing while embarrassing Nicias, and Alcibiades was subsequently appointed General. He took advantage of his increasing power to orchestrate the creation of an alliance between Argos, Mantinea, Elis, and other states in the Peloponnese, threatening Sparta's dominance in the region. According to Gomme, "it was a grandiose scheme for an Athenian general at the head of a mainly Peloponnesian army to march through the Peloponnese cocking a snook at Sparta when her reputation was at its lowest". A.W. Gomme, A Historical Commentary on Thucydides, 70.  This alliance, however, would ultimately be defeated at the Battle of Mantinea. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 15. Somewhere in the years 416–415 BC, a complex struggle took place between Hyperbolos on one side and Nicias and Alcibiades on the other. Hyperbolos tried to bring about the ostracism of one of this pair, but Nicias and Alcibiades combined their influence to induce the people to expel Hyperbolos instead. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 13.  This incident reveals that Nicias and Alcibiades each commanded a personal following, whose votes were determined by the wishes of the leaders. Alcibiades was not one of the Generals involved in the capture of Melos in 416–415 BC, but Plutarch describes him as a supporter of the decree by which the grown men of Melos were killed and the women and children enslaved. Plutarch, Alcibiades, XVI.  The orator Andocides alleges that Alcibiades had a child by one of these enslaved women. Andocides, Against Alcibiades, 22.  Sicilian Expedition  In 415 BC, delegates from the Sicilian city of Segesta ( ) arrived at Athens to plead for the support of the Athenians in their war against Selinus. During the debates on the undertaking, Nicias was vehemently opposed to Athenian intervention, explaining that the campaign would be very costly and attacking the character and motives of Alcibiades, who had emerged as the supporter of the expedition. On the other hand, Alcibiades argued that a campaign in this new theatre would bring riches to the city and expand the empire, just as the Persian Wars had. In his speech Alcibiades predicted (over-optimistically, in the opinion of most historians) that the Athenians would be able to recruit allies in the region and impose their rule on Syracuse, the most powerful city of Sicily. Platias-Koliopoulos, Thucydides on Strategy, 237–46.  In spite of Alcibiades' enthusiastic advocacy for the plan, it was Nicias, not he, who turned a modest undertaking into a massive campaign and made the conquest of Sicily seem possible and safe.  It was at his suggestion that the size of the fleet was significantly increased from 60 ships  to "140 galleys, 5,100 men at arms, and about 1300 archers, slingers, and light armed men".  Philosopher Leo Strauss underscores that the Sicilian expedition surpassed everything undertaken by Pericles. Almost certainly Nicias' intention was to shock the assembly with his high estimate of the forces required, but, instead of dissuading his fellow citizens, his analysis made them all the more eager. L. Strauss, The City and Man, 104.   Against his wishes Nicias was appointed General along with Alcibiades and Lamachus, all three of whom were given full powers to do whatever was in the best interests of Athens while in Sicily. Thucydides,  . One night during preparations for the expedition, the hermai, heads of the god Hermes on a plinth with a phallus, were mutilated throughout Athens. This was a religious scandal and was seen as a bad omen for the mission. Plutarch explains that Androcles, a political leader, used false witnesses who accused Alcibiades and his friends of mutilating the statues, and of profaning the Eleusinian Mysteries. Later his opponents, chief among them being Androcles and Thessalus, Cimon's son, enlisted orators to argue that Alcibiades should set sail as planned and stand trial on his return from the campaign. Alcibiades was suspicious of their intentions, and asked to be allowed to stand trial immediately, under penalty of death, in order to clear his name. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 19.  This request was denied, and the fleet set sail soon after, with the charges unresolved. Thucydides,  .   "Men do not rest content with parrying the attacks of a superior, but often strike the first blow to prevent the attack being made. And we cannot fix the exact point at which our empire shall stop; we have reached a position in which we must not be content with retaining but must scheme to extend it, for, if we cease to rule others, we are in danger of being ruled ourselves. Nor can you look at inaction from the same point of view as others, unless you are prepared to change your habits and make them like theirs."  Alcibiades' Oration before the Sicilian expedition as recorded by Thucydides, (VI, 18) ; Thucydides disclaims verbal accuracy.  As Alcibiades had suspected, his absence emboldened his enemies, and they began to accuse him of other sacrilegious actions and comments and even alleged that these actions were connected with a plot against the democracy. Thucydides,  .  According to Thucydides, the Athenians were always in fear and took everything suspiciously. Thucydides,  .  When the fleet arrived in Catana, it found the state trireme Salaminia waiting to bring Alcibiades and the others indicted for mutilating the hermai or profaning the Eleusinian Mysteries back to Athens to stand trial.  Alcibiades told the heralds that he would follow them back to Athens in his ship, but in Thurii he escaped with his crew; in Athens he was convicted in absentia and condemned to death. His property was confiscated and a reward of one talent was promised to whoever succeeded in killing any who had fled.  Meanwhile the Athenian force in Sicily, after a few early victories, moved against Messina, where the Generals expected their secret allies within the city to betray it to them. Alcibiades, however, foreseeing that he would be outlawed, gave information to the friends of the Syracusans in Messina, who succeeded in preventing the admission of the Athenians. Thucydides,    With the death of Lamachus in battle some time later, command of the Sicilian Expedition fell into the hands of Nicias, whom modern scholars have judged to be an inadequate military leader.  Defection to SpartaAfter his disappearance at Thurii, Alcibiades quickly contacted the Spartans, "promising to render them aid and service greater than all the harm he had previously done them as an enemy" if they would offer him sanctuary. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 23.  The Spartans granted this request and received him among them. In the debate at Sparta over whether to send a force to relieve Syracuse, Alcibiades spoke and instilled fear of Athenian ambition into the Spartan ephors by informing them that the Athenians hoped to conquer Sicily, Italy, and even Carthage. Thucydides,  .  Yale historian Donald Kagan believes that Alcibiades knowingly exaggerated the plans of the Athenians to convince the Spartans of the benefit they stood to gain from his help. Kagan asserts that Alcibiades had not yet acquired his "legendary" reputation, and the Spartans saw him as "a defeated and hunted man" whose policies "produced strategic failures" and brought "no decisive result". If accurate, this assessment underscores one of Alcibiades' greatest talents, his highly persuasive oratory. D. Kagan, The Peloponnesian War, 282–3.  After making the threat seem imminent, Alcibiades advised the Spartans to send troops and most importantly, a Spartan commander to discipline and aid the Syracusans.   "Our party was that of the whole people, our creed being to do our part in preserving the form of government under which the city enjoyed the utmost greatness and freedom, and which we had found existing. As for democracy, the men of sense among us knew what it was, and I perhaps as well as any, as I have the more cause to complain of it; but there is nothing new to be said of a patent absurdity — meanwhile we did not think it safe to alter it under the pressure of your hostility."  Alcibiades' Speech to the Spartans as recorded by Thucydides, (VI, 89]) ; Thucydides disclaims verbal accuracy.  Alcibiades served as a military adviser to Sparta and helped the Spartans secure several crucial successes. He advised them to build a permanent fort at Decelea, just over ten miles (16 km) from Athens and within sight of the city. Thucydides,  .  By doing this, the Spartans cut the Athenians off entirely from their homes and crops and the silver mines of Sunium.  This was part of Alcibiades'plan to renew the war with Athens in Attica. The move was devastating to Athens and forced the citizens to live within the long walls of the city year round, making them entirely dependent on their seaborne trade for food. Seeing Athens thus beleaguered on a second front, members of the Delian League began to contemplate revolt. In the wake of Athens' disastrous defeat in Sicily, Alcibiades sailed to Ionia with a Spartan fleet and succeeded in persuading several critical cities to revolt. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 24.  Thucydides,  . In spite of these valuable contributions to the Spartan cause, Alcibiades fell out of favor with the Spartan government at around this time, ruled by Agis II.    Leotychides, the son born by Agis' wife Timaia shortly after this, was believed by many to be Alcibiades' son. Plutarch, Lysander, 22.  Plutarch, Agesilaus, III.  Alcibiades' influence was further reduced after the retirement of Endius, the ephor who was on good terms with him. P.J. Rhodes, A History of the Classical Greek World, 144.  It is alleged that Astiochus, a Spartan Admiral, was sent orders to kill him, but Alcibiades received warning of this order and defected to the Persian satrap Tissaphernes, who had been supporting the Peloponnesian forces financially in 412 BC. Thucydides,    In Asia Minor On his arrival in the local Persian court, Alcibiades won the trust of the powerful satrap and made several policy suggestions which were well received. According to Thucydides, Alcibiades immediately began to do all he could with Tissaphernes to injure the Peloponnesian cause. At his urging, the satrap reduced the payments he was making to the Peloponnesian fleet and began delivering them irregularly.  Alcibiades next advised Tissaphernes to bribe the Generals of the cities to gain valuable intelligence on their activities. Lastly, and most importantly, he told the satrap to be in no hurry to bring the Persian fleet into the conflict, as the longer the war dragged out the more exhausted the combatants would become. This would allow the Persians to more easily conquer the region in the aftermath of the fighting. Alcibiades tried to convince the satrap that it was in Persia's interest to wear both Athens and Sparta out at first, "and after docking the Athenian power as much as he could, forthwith to rid the country of the Peloponnesians". Thucydides,    Although Alcibiades' advice benefited the Persians, it was merely a means to an end; Thucydides tells us that his real motive was to use his alleged influence with the Persians to effect his restoration to Athens. Thucydides,    Recall to Athens Negotiations with the Athenian oligarchsAlcibiades seemed to assume that the "radical democracy" would never agree to his recall to Athens. T. Buckley, Aspects of Greek History, 411.  Therefore, he exchanged messages with the Athenian leaders at Samos and suggested that if they could install an oligarchy friendly to him he would return to Athens and bring with him Persian money and possibly the Persian fleet of 147 triremes.  Alcibiades set about winning over the most influential military officers, and achieved his goal by offering them a threefold plan: the Athenian constitution was to be changed, the recall of Alcibiades was to be voted, and Alcibiades was to win over Tissaphernes and the King of Persia to the Athenian side. Most of the officers in the Athenian fleet accepted the plan and welcomed the prospect of a narrower constitution, which would allow them a greater share in determining policy. According to Thucydides, only one of the Athenian Generals at Samos, Phrynichus, opposed the plan and argued that Alcibiades cared no more for the proposed oligarchy than for the traditional democracy. R. Sealey, A History of the Greek City States, 359.  The involvement in the plot of another General, Thrasybulus, remains unclear. These officers of the Athenian fleet formed a group of conspirators, but were met with opposition from the majority of the soldiers and sailors; these were eventually calmed down "by the advantageous prospect of the pay from the king". Thucydides,  .  The members of the group assembled and prepared to send Pisander, one of their number, on an embassy to Athens to treat for the restoration of Alcibiades and the abolition of the democracy in the city, and thus to make Tissaphernes the friend of the Athenians. Thucydides,  . Phrynichus, fearing that Alcibiades if restored would avenge himself upon him for his opposition, sent a secret letter to the Spartan Admiral, Astyochus, to tell him that Alcibiades was ruining their cause by making Tissaphernes the friend of the Athenians, and containing an express revelation of the rest of the intrigue. Astyochus went up to Alcibiades and Tissaphernes at Magnesia and communicated to them Phrynichus's letter. Alcibiades responded in kind, sending to the authorities at Samos a letter against Phrynichus, stating what he had done, and requiring that he should be put to death. Thucydides,  .  Phrynichus in desperation wrote again to Astyochus, offering him a chance to destroy the Athenian fleet at Samos. This also Astyochus revealed to Alcibiades who informed the officers at Samos that they had been betrayed by Phrynichus. Alcibiades however gained no credit, because Phrynichus had anticipated Alcibiades' letter and, before the accusations could arrive, told the army that he had received information of an enemy plan to attack the camp and that they should fortify Samos as quickly as possible. Thucydides,  . Despite these events, Pisander and the other envoys of the conspirators arrived at Athens and made a speech before the people. Pisander won the argument, putting Alcibiades and his promises at the center. The Ecclesia deposed Phrynichus and elected Pisander and ten other envoys to negotiate with Tissaphernes and Alcibiades. Thucydides,  . At this point, Alcibiades' scheme encountered a great obstacle. Tissaphernes would not make an agreement on any terms, wanting to follow his policy of neutrality. D. Kagan, The Fall of the Athenian Empire, 136–8.  As Kagan points out, Tissaphernes was a prudent leader and had recognized the advantages of wearing each side out without direct Persian involvement.  Alcibiades realized this and, by presenting the Athenians with stiffer and stiffer demands on Tissaphernes' behalf, attempted to convince them that he had persuaded Tissaphernes to support them, but that they had not conceded enough to him. Although the envoys were angered at the audacity of the Persian demands, they nevertheless departed with the impression that Alcibiades could have brought about an agreement among the powers if he had chosen to do so. Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War,  .  This   at the court of Tissaphernes, however, put an end to the negotiations between the conspirators and Alcibiades.  The group was convinced that Alcibiades could not deliver his side of the bargain without demanding exorbitantly high concessions of them and they accordingly abandoned their plans to restore him to Athens.  Reinstatement as an Athenian General  In spite of the failure of the negotiations, the conspirators succeeded in overthrowing the democracy and imposing the oligarchic government of the Four Hundred, among the leaders of which were Phrynichus and Pisander. At Samos, however, a similar coup instigated by the conspirators did not go forward so smoothly. Samian democrats learned of the conspiracy and notified four prominent Athenians: the generals Leon and Diomedon, the trierarch Thrasybulus, and Thrasyllus, at that time a hoplite in the ranks. With the support of these men and the Athenian soldiers in general, the Samian democrats were able to defeat the 300 Samian oligarchs who attempted to seize power there. Thucydides,  .  Further, the Athenian troops at Samos formed themselves into a political assembly, deposed their generals, and elected new ones, including Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus. The army, stating that they had not revolted from the city but that the city had revolted from them, resolved to stand by the democracy while continuing to prosecute the war against Sparta. After a time, Thrasybulus persuaded the assembled troops to vote Alcibiades' recall, a policy that he had supported since before the coup. Then he sailed to retrieve Alcibiades and returned with him to Samos. The aim of this policy was to win away Persian support from the Spartans, as it was still believed that Alcibiades had great influence with Tissaphernes. Thucydides,  .  Plutarch claims that the army sent for Alcibiades so as to use his help in putting down the tyrants in Athens. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 26.  Kagan argues that this reinstatement was a disappointment to Alcibiades, who had hoped for a glorious return to Athens itself but found himself only restored to the rebellious fleet, where the immunity from prosecution he had been granted "protected him for the time being but not from a reckoning in the future"; furthermore, the recall, which Alcibiades had hoped to bring about through his own prestige and perceived influence, was achieved through the patronage of Thrasybulus. Kagan, The Peloponnesian War, 389. At his first speech to the assembled troops, Alcibiades complained bitterly about the circumstances of his exile, but the greatest part of the speech consisted of boasting about his influence with Tissaphernes. The primary motives of his speech were to make the oligarchs at Athens afraid of him and to increase his credit with the army at Samos. Upon hearing his speech the troops immediately elected him General alongside Thrasybulus and the others. In fact, he roused them so much that they proposed to sail at once for Piraeus and attack the oligarchs in Athens. Thucydides,  .  It was primarily Alcibiades, along with Thrasybulus, who calmed the people and showed them the folly of this proposal, which would have sparked civil war and led to the immediate defeat of Athens.  Shortly after Alcibiades' reinstatement as an Athenian general, the government of the Four Hundred was overthrown and replaced by a broader oligarchy, which would eventually give way to democracy. Presently Alcibiades sailed to Tissaphernes with a detachment of ships. According to Plutarch, the supposed purpose of this mission was to stop the Persian fleet from coming to the aid of the Peloponnesians.  Thucydides is in agreement with Plutarch that the Persian fleet was at Aspendus and that Alcibiades told the troops he would bring the fleet to their side or prevent it from coming at all, but Thucydides further speculates that the real reason was to flaunt his new position to Tissaphernes and try to gain some real influence over him.  According to the historian, Alcibiades had long known that Tissaphernes never meant to bring the fleet at all. Thucydides,  .  Battles of Abydos and Cyzicus  For more details on this topic, see Battle of Abydos and Battle of Cyzicus Alcibiades was recalled by the "intermediate regime" of The Five Thousand, the government which succeeded the Four Hundred in 411, but it is most likely that he waited until 407 BC to actually return to the city. Cartwright-Warner, A Historical Commentary on Thucydides, 301.  Plutarch tells us that, although his recall had already been passed on motion of Critias, a political ally of his, Alcibiades was resolved to come back with glory. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 27.  While this was certainly his goal, it was again a means to an end, that end being avoiding prosecution upon his return to Athens.The next significant part he would play in the war would occur at the Battle of Abydos. Alcibiades had remained behind at Samos with a small force while Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus led the greater part of the fleet to the Hellespont. During this period, Alcibiades succeeded in raising money from Caria and the neighboring area, with which he was able to pay the rowers and gain their favor.  After the Athenian victory at Cynossema, both fleets summoned all their ships from around the Aegean to join them for what might be a decisive next engagement. While Alcibiades was still en route, the two fleets clashed at Abydos, where the Peloponnesians had set up their main naval base. The battle was evenly matched, and raged for a long time, but the balance tipped towards the Athenians when Alcibiades sailed into the Hellespont with eighteen triremes.  Xenophon, Hellenica, 1.1.5.  The Persian satrap Pharnabazus, who had replaced Tissaphernes as the sponsor of the Peloponnesian fleet, moved his land army to the shore to defend the ships and sailors who had beached their ships. Only the support of the Persian land army and the coming of night saved the Peloponnesian fleet from complete destruction. Shortly after the battle, Tissaphernes had arrived in the Hellespont and Alcibiades left the fleet at Sestos to meet him, bringing gifts and hoping to once again try to win over the Persian governor. Evidently Alcibiades had gravely misjudged his standing with the satrap, and he was arrested on arrival.  Within a month he would escape and resume command. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 28.  It was now obvious, however, that he had no influence with the Persians; from now on his authority would depend on what he actually could accomplish rather than on what he promised to do. Kagan, The Peloponnesian War, 410. After an interlude of several months in which the Peloponnesians constructed new ships and the Athenians besieged cities and raised money throughout the Aegean, the next major sea battle took place the spring of 410 BC at Cyzicus. Alcibiades had been forced to flee from Sestos to Cardia to protect his small fleet from the rebuilt Peloponnesian navy, but as soon as the Athenian fleet was reunited there its commanders led it to Cyzicus, where the Athenians had intelligence indicating that Pharnabazus and Mindarus, the Peloponnesian fleet commander, were together plotting their next move. Concealed by storm and darkness, the combined Athenian force reached the vicinity without being spotted by the Peloponnesians.  Here the Athenians devised a plot to draw the enemy into battle. According to Diodorus Siculus, Alcibiades advanced with a small squadron in order to draw the Spartans out to battle, and, after he successfully deceived Mindarus with this ploy, the squadrons of Thrasybulus and Theramenes came to join him, cutting off the Spartans' retreat.  Diodorus, XIII, 50–1. The Spartan fleet suffered losses in the flight and reached the shore with the Athenians in close pursuit. Alcibiades' troops, leading the Athenian pursuit, landed and attempted to pull the Spartan ships back out to sea. The Peloponnesians fought to prevent their ships from being towed away, and Pharnabazus's troops came up to support them. Xenophon, Hellenica, 1.1.17–23.  Thrasybulus landed his own force to temporarily relieve pressure on Alcibiades, and meanwhile ordered Theramenes to join up with Athenian land forces nearby and bring them to reinforce the sailors and marines on the beach. The Spartans and Persians, overwhelmed by the arrival of multiple forces from several directions, were defeated and driven off, and the Athenians captured all the Spartan ships which were not destroyed.   A letter dispatched to Sparta by Hippocrates, vice-admiral under Mindarus, was intercepted and taken to Athens; it ran as follows: "The ships are lost. Mindarus is dead. The men are starving. We know not what to do".  A short time later Sparta petitioned for peace, but their appeals were ultimately rejected by the Athenians. Diodorus, Library, 52–3.  Further military successes After their victory, Alcibiades and Thrasybulus began the siege of Chalcedon in 409 BC with about 190 ships.  Although unable to attain a decisive victory or induce the city to surrender, Alcibiades was able to win a small tactical land battle outside of the city gates and Theramenes concluded an agreement with the Chalcedonians. Diodorus, Library, xiii, 66.3  Afterwards they concluded a temporary alliance with Pharnabazus which secured some much needed immediate cash for the army, but despite this Alcibiades was still forced to depart in search for more booty to pay the soldiers and oarsmen of the fleet.In pursuit of these funds he traveled to the Thracian Chersonese and attacked Selymbria. He plotted with a pro-Athenian party within the city and offered the Selymbrians reasonable terms and imposed strict discipline to see that they were observed. He did their city no injury whatsoever, but merely took a sum of money from it, set a garrison in it and left. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 30  Epigraphical evidence indicates the Selymbrians surrendered hostages until the treaty was ratified in Athens.  His performance is judged as skillful by historians, since it saved time, resources, and lives and still fully achieved his goal.  From here Alcibiades joined in the siege of Byzantium along with Theramenes and Thrasyllus. A portion of the citizens of the city, demoralized and hungry, decided to surrender the city to Alcibiades for similar terms as the Selymbrians had received. On the designated night the defenders left their posts, and the Athenians attacked the Peloponnesian garrison in the city and their boats in the harbor. The portion of the citizenry that remained loyal to the Peloponnesians fought so savagely that Alcibiades issued a statement in the midst of the fighting which guaranteed their safety and this persuaded the remaining citizens to turn against the Peloponnesian garrison, which was nearly totally destroyed. Diodorus, Library, xiii, 67.1  Return to Athens, Dismissal and Death Return to AthensIt was in the aftermath of these successes that Alcibiades resolved to finally return to Athens in the spring of 407 BC. Even in the wake of his recent victories, Alcibiades was exceedingly careful in his return, mindful of the changes in government, the charges still technically hanging over him, and the great injury he had done to Athens. Thus Alcibiades, instead of going straight home, first went to Samos to pick up 20 ships and proceeded with them to the Ceramic Gulf where he collected 100 talents. He finally sailed to Gytheion to make inquiries, partly about the reported preparations of the Spartans there, and partly about the feelings in Athens about his return.  His inquiries assured him that the city was kindly disposed towards him and that his closest friends urged him to return. Therefore he finally sailed into Piraeus where the crowd had gathered, desiring to see the famous Alcibiades.  He entered the harbor full of fear till he saw his cousin and others of his friends and acquaintance, who invited him to land. Upon arriving on shore he was greeted with a hero's welcome. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 32.  Nevertheless, some saw an evil omen in the fact that he had returned to Athens on the very day when the ceremony of the Plynteria (the feast where the old statue of Athena would get cleansed) was being celebrated. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 34.  This was regarded as the unluckiest day of the year to undertake anything of importance.  His enemies took note of this and kept it in mind for a future occasion. All the criminal proceedings against him were canceled and the charges of blasphemy were officially withdrawn. Alcibiades was able to assert his piety and to raise Athenian morale by leading the solemn procession to Eleusis (for the celebration of the Eleusinian Mysteries) by land for the first time since the Spartans had occupied Decelea.  The procession had been replaced by a journey by sea, but this year Alcibiades used a detachment of soldiers to escort the traditional procession.  His property was restored and the ecclesia elected him supreme commander of land and sea (strategos autokrator). Plutarch, Alcibiades, 33  Defeat at Notium  In 406 BC Alcibiades set out from Athens with 1,500 hoplites and a hundred ships. He failed to take Andros and then he went on to Samos. Later he moved to Notium, closer to the enemy at Ephesus. A. Andrewes, The Spartan Resurgence, 490  In the meanwhile Tissaphernes had been replaced by Cyrus the Younger (son of Darius II of Persia) who decided to financially support the Peloponnesians. This new revenue started to attract Athenian deserters to the Spartan navy. Additionally the Spartans had replaced Mindarus with Lysander, a very capable Admiral. These factors caused the rapid growth of the Peloponnesian fleet at the expense of the Athenian. In search of funds and needing to force another decisive battle, Alcibiades left Notium and sailed to help Thrasybulus in the siege of Phocaea.  Alcibiades was aware the Spartan fleet was nearby, so he left nearly eighty ships to watch them under the command of his personal helmsman Antiochus, who was given express orders not to attack. Antiochus disobeyed this single order and endeavored to draw Lysander into a fight by imitating the tactics used at Cyzicus. The situation at Notium, however, was radically different than that at Cyzicus; the Athenians possessed no element of surprise, and Lysander had been well informed about their fleet by deserters.  Antiochus's ship was sunk, and he was killed by a sudden Spartan attack; the remaining ships of the decoy force were then chased headlong back toward Notium, where the main Athenian force was caught unprepared by the sudden arrival of the whole Spartan fleet. In the ensuing fighting, Lysander gained an entire victory. Alcibiades soon returned and desperately tried to undo the defeat at Notium by scoring another victory, but Lysander could not be compelled to attack the fleet again. Responsibility for the defeat ultimately fell on Alcibiades, and his enemies used the opportunity to attack him and have him removed from command, although some modern scholars believe that Alcibiades was unfairly blamed for Antiochus's mistake. G. Cawkwell, Thucydides and the Peloponnesian War, 143  Diodorus reports that, in addition to his mistake at Notium, Alcibiades was discharged on account of false accusations brought against him by his enemies. Diodorus, Library, xiii, 74.4  According to Anthony Andrewes, professor of ancient history, the extravagant hopes that his successes of the previous summer had created were a decisive element in his downfall.  Consequently Alcibiades condemned himself to exile.  Never again returning to Athens, he sailed north to the castles in the Thracian Chersonese, which he had secured during his time in the Hellespont. The implications of the defeat were severe for Athens. Although the defeat had been minor, it occasioned the removal of not only Alcibiades but also his allies like Thrasybulus, Theramenes and Critias.  These were likely the most capable commanders Athens had at the time and their removal would help lead to the Athenian surrender only two years later after their complete defeat at Aegospotami.  Death With one exception, Alcibiades' role in the war ended with his command. Prior to the Battle of Aegospotami, in the last attested fact of his career, B. Perrin, The Death of Alcibiades , 25–37.  Alcibiades recognized that the Athenians were anchored in a tactically disadvantageous spot and advised them to move to Sestus where they could benefit from a harbor and a city. Xenophon, Hellenica, 2.1.25.  Diodorus, however, does not mention this advice, arguing instead that Alcibiades offered the Generals Thracian aid in exchange for a share in the command.  In any case, the Generals of the Athenians, "considering that in case of defeat the blame would attach to them and that in case of success all men would attribute it to Alcibiades", asked him to leave and not come near the camp ever again.  Diodorus, Library, xiii, 105.  Days later the fleet would be annihilated by Lysander.After the Battle of Aegospotami, Alcibiades crossed the Hellespont and took refuge in Phrygia, with the object of securing the aid of Artaxerxes against Sparta.Much about Alcibiades' death is now uncertain, as there are conflicting accounts. According to the oldest of these, the Spartans and specifically Lysander were responsible. Isocrates, Concerning the Team of Horses, 16.40   Though many of his details cannot be independently corroborated, Plutarch's version is this:  Lysander sent an envoy to Pharnabazus who then dispatched his brother to Phrygia where Alcibiades was living with his mistress, Timandra.  In 404 BC, as he was about to set out for the Persian court, his residence was surrounded and set on fire. Seeing no chance of escape he rushed out on his assassins, dagger in hand, and was killed by a shower of arrows. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 39.   According to Aristotle, the site of Alcibiades’ death was Elaphus, a mountain in Phrygia. Aristotle, History of Animals, 578b27; cf. John & William Langhorne, Plutarch's Lives (1819), vol. 2, p. 172, n. 99.  Assessments Political careerIn ancient Greece, Alcibiades was a polarizing figure. According to Thucydides, Alcibiades, being "exceedingly ambitious", proposed the expedition in Sicily in order "to gain in wealth and reputation by means of his successes". Alcibiades is not held responsible by Thucydides for the destruction of Athens, since "his habits gave offence to every one, and caused the Athenians to commit affairs to other hands, and thus before long to ruin the city". Thucydides, VI, 15.  Plutarch regards him as "the least scrupulous and most entirely careless of human beings". Plutarch, The Comparison of Alcibiades with Coriolanus, 6  On the other hand, Diodorus argues that he was "in spirit brilliant and intent upon great enterprises". Diodorus, Library, xiii, 68.5.  Sharon Press of Brown University points out that Xenophon emphasizes Alcibiades' service to the state, rather than the harm he was charged with causing it. S. Press, Was Alcibiades a Good General?  Xenophon, Hellenica, 1.4. 18.  Demosthenes defends Alcibiades's achievements, saying that he had taken arms in the cause of democracy, displaying his patriotism, not by gifts of money or by speeches, but by personal service. Demosthenes, Against Meidias, 144–5.  For Demosthenes and other orators, Alcibiades epitomized the figure of the great man during the glorious days of the Athenian democracy and became a rhetorical symbol. D. Gribble, Alcibiades and Athens, 32–3.  One of Isocrates' speeches, delivered by Alcibiades the Younger, argues that the statesman deserved the Athenians' gratitude for the service he had given them. Isocrates, Concerning the Team of Horses, 15.  Lysias, on the other hand, argued in one of his orations that the Athenians should regard Alcibiades as an enemy because of the general tenor of his life, as "he repays with injury the open assistance of any of his friends". Lysias, Against Alcibiades 1, 1.  Lysias, Against Alcibiades 2, 10.  In the Constitution of the Athenians, Aristotle does not include Alcibiades in the list of the best Athenian politicians, but in Posterior Analytics he argues that traits of a proud man like Alcibiades are "equanimity amid the vicissitudes of life and impatience of dishonor". Aristotle, Constitution of the Athenians,  .  Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, ii, 13.  Alcibiades excited in his contemporaries a fear for the safety of the political order. D. Gribble, Alcibiades and Athens, 41.  Therefore, Andocides said of him that "instead of holding that he ought himself to conform with the laws of the state, he expects you to conform with his own way of life". Andocides, Against Alcibiades, 19.  Central to the depiction of the Athenian statesman is Cornelius Nepos' famous phrase that Alcibiades "surpassed all the Athenians in grandeur and magnificence of living". Cornelius Nepos, Alcibiades, XI. Even today, Alcibiades divides scholars. For Malcolm F. McGregor, former head of the Department of Classics in the University of British Columbia, Alcibiades was rather a shrewd gambler than a mere opportunist. M.F. McGregor, The Genius of Alkibiades, 27–50.  Evangelos P. Fotiadis, a prominent Greek philologist, asserts that Alcibiades was "a first class diplomat" and had "huge skills". Nevertheless his spiritual powers were not counterbalanced with his magnificent mind and he had the hard luck to lead a people susceptible to demagoguery.  K. Paparrigopoulos, a major modern Greek historian, underlines his "spiritual virtues" and compares him with Themistocles, but he then asserts that all these gifts created a "traitor, an audacious and impious man". Κ. Paparrigopoulos, History of the Greek Nation, Αβ, 264–8.  Walter Ellis believes that his actions were outrageous, but they were performed with panache.  For his part, David Gribble argues that Alcibiades' actions against his city were misunderstood and believes that "the tension which led to Alcibiades' split with the city was between purely personal and civic values". D. Gribble, Alcibiades and Athens, 55 &c.  Russell Meiggs, a British ancient historian, asserts that the Athenian statesman was absolutely unscrupulous despite his great charm and brilliant abilities. According to Meiggs his actions were dictated by selfish motives and his feud with Cleon and his successors undermined Athens. The same scholar underscores the fact that "his example of restless and undisciplined ambition strengthened the charge brought against Socrates".  Even more critically, Athanasios G. Platias and Constantinos Koliopoulos, professors of strategic studies and international politics, state that Alcibiades' own arguments "should be sufficient to do away with the notion that Alcibiades was a great statesman, as some people still believe". A.G. Platias and C. Koliopoulos, Thucydides on Strategy, 240.  Writing from a different perspective, psychologist Anna C. Salter cites Alcibiades as exhibiting "all the classic features of psychopathy."   A similar assessment is made by Hervey Cleckley at the end of chapter 5 in his The Mask of Sanity. Military achievements  Despite his critical comments, Thucydides admits in a short digression that "publicly his conduct of the war was as good as could be desired".  Diodorus and Demosthenes regard him as a great general.   According to Fotiadis, Alcibiades was an invincible general and, wherever he went, victory followed him; had he led the army in Sicily, the Athenians would have avoided disaster and, had his countrymen followed his advice at Aegospotami, Lysander would have lost and Athens would have ruled Greece.  On the other hand, Paparrigopoulos believes that the Sicilian Expedition, prompted by Alcibiades, was a strategic mistake. Κ. Paparrigopoulos, History of the Greek Nation, Αβ, 272.  In agreement with Paparrigopoulos, Platias and Koliopoulos underscore the fact that the Sicilian expedition was a strategic blunder of the first magnitude, resulting from a "frivolous attitude and an unbelievable underestimation of the enemy".  For his part, Angelos Vlachos, a Greek Academician, underlines the constant interest of Athens for Sicily from the beginning of the war.  According to Vlachos the expedition had nothing of the extravagant or adventurous and constituted a rational strategic decision based on traditional Athenian aspirations. A. Vlachos, Thucydides' Bias, 206.  Vlachos asserts that Alcibiades had already conceived a broader plan: the conquest of the whole West. A. Vlachos, Thucydides' Bias, 202–3.  He intended to conquer Carthage and Libya, then to attack Italy and, after winning these, to seize Italy and Peloponnesus. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 17.  The initial decision of the ecclesia provided however for a reasonable military force, which later became unreasonably large and costly because of Nicias' demands.  Kagan criticizes Alcibiades for failing to recognize that the large size of the Athenian expedition undermined the diplomatic scheme on which his strategy rested. D. Kagan, The Fall of the Athenian Empire, 419–20. Kagan believes that while Alcibiades was a commander of considerable ability, he was no military genius, and his confidence and ambitions went far beyond his skills. He thus was capable of important errors and serious miscalculations. Kagan argues that at Notium, Alcibiades committed a serious error in leaving the fleet in the hands of an inexperienced officer, and that most of the credit for the brilliant victory at Cyzicus must be assigned to Thrasybulus.  In this judgement, Kagan agrees with Cornelius Nepos, who said that the Athenians' extravagant opinion of Alcibiades' abilities and valor was his chief misfortune. Cornelius Nepos, Alcibiades, VII. Press argues that "though Alcibiades can be considered a good General on the basis of his performance in the Hellespont, he would not be considered so on the basis of his performance in Sicily", but "the strengths of Alcibiades' performance as a General outweigh his faults".  Professors David McCann and Barry Strauss attempt a comparison between Alcibiades and Douglas MacArthur, pointing out that "both men stood out as military leaders to whom a mystique attached itself". D. McCann, B. Strauss, War and Democracy, xxv.  Skill in oratoryPlutarch asserts that "Alcibiades was a most able speaker in addition to his other gifts", while Theophrastus argues that Alcibiades was the most capable of discovering and understanding what was required in a given case. Nevertheless, he would often stumble in the midst of his speech, but then he would resume and proceed with all the caution in the world. Plutarch, Alcibiades, 10.  Even the lisp he had, which was noticed by Aristophanes, made his talk persuasive and full of charm. Aristophanes, Wasps, 44.  Plutarch, Alcibiades, 1.  Eupolis says that he was "prince of talkers, but in speaking most incapable";  which is to say, more eloquent in his private discourses than when orating before the ecclesia. For his part, Demosthenes underscores the fact that Alcibiades was regarded as "the ablest speaker of the day".  Paparrigopoulos does not accept Demosthenes's opinion, but acknowledges that the Athenian statesman could sufficiently support his case.  Kagan acknowledges his rhetorical power, whilst Thomas Habinek, professor of Classics at the University of Southern California, believes that the orator Alcibiades seemed to be whatever his audience needed on any given occasion. D. Kagan, The Fall of the Athenian Empire, 178.  T. Habinek, Ancient Rhetoric and Oratory, 23–4.  According to Habinek, in the field of oratory, the people responded to Alcibiades' affection with affection of their own. Therefore, the orator was "the institution of the city talking to — and loving — itself".  According to Aristophanes, Athens "yearns for him, and hates him too, but wants him back". Aristophanes, Frogs, 1425.  References in Comedy, Philosophy, Art and Literature  Alcibiades has not been spared by ancient comedy and stories attest to an epic confrontation between Alcibiades and Eupolis resembling that between Aristophanes and Cleon.  He also appears as a character in several Socratic dialogues (Symposium, Protagoras, Alcibiades I and II, as well as the eponymous dialogues by Aeschines Socraticus and Antisthenes). Purportedly based on his own personal experience, Antisthenes described Alcibiades' extraordinary physical strength, courage, and beauty, saying, "If Achilles did not look like this, he was not really handsome."   In his trial, Socrates must rebut the attempt to hold him guilty for the crimes of his former students, including Alcibiades.  Hence, he declares in Apology: "I have never been anyone's teacher". Plato, Apology, 33a  Aristophanes mocked his heavy lisp in the satirical play, The Wasps, "Look, Thothiath, Theowuth ith twanthformed. He'th a waven!" He is portrayed as one of Cleon's close friends.Long after his death, Alcibiades continues to appear in art, both in Medieval and Renaissance works, and in several significant works of modern literature as well.  He still fascinates the modern world, doing so most notably as the main character in historical novels of authors like Anna Bowman Dodd, Gertrude Atherton, Rosemary Sutcliff, Daniel Chavarria, Steven Pressfield and Peter Green.  He is also a central character in Paul Levinson's time travel novel The Plot To Save Socrates, in Kurt R. A. Giambastiani's time travel novel Unraveling Time, in Erik Satie's Socrate, a work for voice and small orchestra (the text is composed of excerpts of Victor Cousin's translation of works by Plato), and in Joel Richards' Nebula award-nominated short story The Gods Abandon Alcibiades.  Alcibiades also figures in the satirical Picture This by Joseph Heller and in William Shakespeare's Timon of Athens.Alcibiades is mentioned in observance II of law 44 " Disarm and infuriate with the mirror effect " in Robert Greene's book The 48 Laws of Power. In it the author writes about Alcibiades ability to mimic the people he is in the presence of such as the Spartans and then the people of Persia.In Harry Turtledove's 2002 alternate history story, The Daimon, the point of the departure is that Alcibiades commands the Sicilian Expedition to a decisive victory before returning to Athens.  Uniting the Greek city-states, the conquest of the Persian Empire proceeds under the Athenian, Alcibiades, rather than under the Macedonian, Alexander the Great, roughly 80 years later. Notes  Timeline of Alcibiades' life (c. 450–404 BC)                               Citations  References Primary sources   Andocides, Against Alcibiades. See original text in Perseus program   Aristophanes, Wasps. See original text in Perseus program   Aristotle, History of Animals (translated in English by Wentworth Thompson)   Translation by G. R. G. Mure   Demosthenes, Against Meidias. See original text in Perseus program Diodorus Siculus, Library, 13th Book. See original text in Perseus program. Isocrates, Busiris. See original text in Perseus program Isocrates, Concerning the Team of Horses. See original text in Perseus program   Lysias, Against Alcibiades 2. See original text in Perseus program Plato, Alcibiades. See original text in  Perseus program.  Translated in English by Sanderson Beck.       Translated in English by John Dryden   Translated in English by Arthur H. Clough (New York: Collier Press, 1909), Aubrey Stewart-George Long and John Dryden.     Translated into English by Aubrey Stewart-George Long and John Dryden. Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, V-VIII. See original text in Perseus program.     Secondary sources          In Greek.                                             Paparrigopoulos, Konstantinos (-Pavlos Karolidis) (1925), History of the Hellenic Nation (Volume Ab). Eleftheroudakis (in Greek).                        In Greek. Vlachos, Angelos (1974). Thucydides' Bias. Estia (in Greek).     Further reading                   Hughes-Hallett, Lucy.  Heroes:  A History of Hero Worship.  Alfred A. Knopf, New York, New York, 2004.  ISBN 1-4000-4399-9.   Pressfield, Steven.  Tides of War:  A Novel of Alcibiades and the Peloponnesian War.  Doubleday, New York, New York, 2000.  ISBN 0-385-49252-9.         External links   Biographical             Texts and analyses
Aldhelm   Aldhelm ( ) (c. 639 – 25 May 709), Abbot of Malmesbury Abbey, Bishop of Sherborne, Latin poet and scholar of Anglo-Saxon literature, was born before the middle of the 7th century. He is said to have been the son of Kenten, who was of the royal house of Wessex. Walsh A New Dictionary of Saints p. 21-22  He was certainly not, as Aldhelm's early biographer Faritius asserts, the brother of King Ine. After his death he was venerated as a saint, his feast day being the day of his death, 25th May. Life  Early life and educationAldhelm received his first education in the school of an Irish scholar and monk, Máeldub (also Maildubh, Maildulf or Meldun) (died c. 675), who had settled in the British stronghold of Bladon (or Bladow) on the site of the town called Mailduberi, Maldubesburg, Meldunesburg, etc., and finally Malmesbury, after him.In 668, Pope Vitalian sent Theodore of Tarsus to be Archbishop of Canterbury. At the same time the African scholar Hadrian, became abbot of St Augustine's at Canterbury. Aldhelm was one of his disciples,  for he addresses him as the 'venerable preceptor of my rude childhood.' He must, nevertheless, have been thirty years of age when he began to study with Hadrian. His studies included Roman law, astronomy, astrology, the art of reckoning and the difficulties of the calendar. He learned, according to the doubtful statements of the early lives, both Greek and Hebrew. He certainly introduces many Latinized Greek words into his works.Ill health compelled him to leave Canterbury, and he returned to Malmesbury Abbey, where he was a monk under Máeldub for fourteen years, dating probably from 661, and including the period of his studies with Hadrian. Abbot of MalmesburyWhen Máeldub died, Aldhelm was appointed in 675,  according to a charter of doubtful authenticity cited by William of Malmesbury, by Leuthere, Bishop of Winchester (671–676), to succeed to the direction of the monastery, of which he became the first abbot.Aldhelm introduced the Benedictine rule, and secured the right of the election of the abbot to the monks themselves. The community at Malmesbury increased, and Aldhelm was able to found two other monasteries as centres of learning, at Frome, Somerset and at Bradford on Avon, Wiltshire.  The little church of St Lawrence at Bradford  on Avon dates back to his time, and may safely be regarded as his.  At Malmesbury he built a new church to replace Máeldub's modest building, and obtained considerable grants of land for the monastery. Contemporary reputationHis fame as a scholar spread to other countries.  Artwil, the son of an Irish king, submitted his writings for Aldhelm's approval, and Cellanus, an Irish monk from Peronne, was one of his correspondents.  Aldhelm was the first Anglo-Saxon, so far as we know, to write in Latin verse, and his letter to Acircius (Aldfrith or Eadfrith, king of Northumbria) is a treatise on Latin prosody for the use of his countrymen.  In this work he included his most famous productions, 101 riddles in Latin hexameters.  Each of them is a complete picture, and one of them runs to 83 lines.That his merits as a scholar were early recognized in his own country is shown by the encomium of Bede (Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum 5.18), who speaks of him as a wonder of erudition.  His fame reached Italy, and at the request of Pope Sergius I he paid a visit to Rome, of which, however, there is no notice in his extant writings.  On his return, bringing with him privileges for his monastery and a magnificent altar, he received a popular ovation. Easter controversyHe was deputed by a synod of the church in Wessex to remonstrate with the Britons of Dumnonia (Devon and Cornwall) on the Easter controversy. British Christians followed a unique system of calculation for the date of Easter and also bore a distinctive tonsure; these customs are generally associated with the practice known as Celtic Christianity. Aldhelm wrote a long and rather acrimonious letter to king Geraint of Dumnonia (Geruntius) achieving ultimate agreement with Rome. Bishop of SherborneIn 705, or perhaps earlier, Hædde, Bishop of Winchester, died, and the diocese was divided into two parts.  Sherborne was the new see, of which Aldhelm became the first bishop around 705. Fryde, et al. Handbook of British Chronology p. 222   He wished to resign the abbey of Malmesbury which he had governed for thirty years, but yielding to the remonstrances of the monks he continued to direct it until his death. He was now an old man, but he showed great activity in his new functions.  The cathedral church which he built at Sherborne, though replaced later by a Norman church, is described by William of Malmesbury. In his capacity as bishop, he displayed a great deal of energy. This included going into public places where he would sing hymns and passages from the gospels interspersed with bits of clowning to draw attention to his message. Death and venerationAldhelm was on his rounds in his diocese   when he died at the church of Doulting in 709.  The body was taken to Malmesbury, and crosses were set up by his friend, Egwin, Bishop of Worcester, at the various stopping-places.  He was buried in the church of St Michael at Malmesbury Abbey. Blair "Handlist of Anglo-Saxon Saints" Local Saints and Local Churches p. 512  His biographers relate miracles due to his sanctity worked during his lifetime and at his shrine. The cape in Dorset commonly known as St Alban's Head is more properly called St. Aldhelm's Head in his honour.He was revered as a saint after his death, with his feast day being celebrated on 25 May.  His relics were translated in 980 by Dunstan, the Archbishop of Canterbury.  He is commemorated by a statue in niche 124 of the West Front of Salisbury Cathedral.St. Aldhelm's flag may be flown in his celebration. The flag, a white cross on a red background, is a colour reversed version of England St. George flag  Writings Aldhelm wrote in elaborate and grandiloquent and very difficult Latin, which became the dominant Latin style for centuries, though eventually came to be regarded as barbarous.  His works became standard school texts in monastic schools, until his influence declined around the time of the Norman Conquest.Aldhelm's collected works were edited by Rudolf Ehwald, Aldhelmi opera (Berlin, 1919). An earlier edition by J.A. Giles, Patres eccl. Angl. (Oxford, 1844) was reprinted by JP Migne in his Patrologiae Cursus, vol. 89 (1850). Prose  De Laude Virginitatis (the prose De Virginitate), a Latin treatise on virginity addressed to the nuns of the double monastery at Barking, is Aldhelm's best-known work. After a long preface extolling the merits of virginity, he commemorates a great number of male and female saints. Aldhelm later wrote a shorter, poetic version (see below). Epistola ad Acircium (sive Liber de septenario, et de metris, aenigmatibus ac pedum regulis), dedicated to King Aldfrith of Northumbria (r. 685-704/5). The chief source of his Epistola ad Acircium (ed. A. Mai, Class. Auct. vol. V) is Priscian. The acrostic introduction gives the sentence, 'Aldhelmus cecinit millenis versibus odas,' whether read from the initial or final letters of the lines. After an address to King Aldfrith, the letter consists of three treatises: De septenario, treatise on the number seven in arithmology De metris, treatise on metre, including the Enigmata (see below). De pedum regulis, didactive treatise on metrical feet, such as iambs and spondees. Other Letters. Correspondents include Bishop Leuthere, Hadrian, King Geraint of Dumnonia, Eahfrid, Cellanus, Sergius and Aldhelm’s pupils Wihtfrith and Æthelwald, who was responsible for part of the Carmen rhythmicum.  The letter to King Geraint of Dumnonia, was supposed to have been destroyed by the Britons (William of Malmesbury, Gesta Pontificum, p. 361), but was discovered with others of Aldhelm's in the correspondence of St Boniface, archbishop of Mainz. A long letter to Eahfrid, a scholar just returned from Ireland (first printed in Usher, Veterum Epistt. Hiber. Sylloge, 1632), is of interest as casting light on the relations between English and Irish scholars.   Poetry  Carmen de virginitate (the poetic De Virginitate). Aldhelm wrote a shorter, poetic version of De Laude Virginitatis, which closes with a battle of the virtues against the vices, the De octo principalibus vitiis (first printed by Delrio, Mainz, 1601). The two works are what is sometimes called an opus geminatum or "twin work". Carmen rhythmicum, rhythmic poem which describes a travel through western England and the way a wooden church was affected by a storm. Carmina ecclesiastica (modern title), i.e. a number of Latin tituli designed for inscription on a church or altar. They are: (1) In Basilica Sanctorum Petri et Pauli, for a church dedicated to St Peter and St Paul, possibly the church which Aldhem founded at Malmesbury, (2) In Basilica Beatae Mariae Semper Virginis, St Mary's Church, possibly also at Malmesbury, (3) In Ecclesia Mariae a Bugge Extructa, for the church built by Bugga, that is Eadburh of Minster-in-Thanet, a royal lady of the house of Wessex, (4) the twelve tituli known collectively as In Duodecim Apostolorum Aris and (5) In sancti Matthiae Apostoli Ecclesia. Enigmata, 100 (hexa)metrical riddles, included in the Epistola ad Acircium for purposes of illustration (see above). For these riddles, Aldhelm's model was the collection known as Symposii Aenigmata ("The Riddles of Symphosius").   Lost worksAccording to William of Malmesbury, Aldhelm also wrote poetry in Old English, and set his own compositions to music, but none of his songs, which were still popular in the time of Alfred, have come down to us. Finding his people slow to come to church, he is said to have stood at the end of a bridge singing songs in the vernacular, thus collecting a crowd to listen to exhortations on sacred subjects.  See also  Leiden Glossary   Notes  Editions and translations  Ehwald, Rudolf (ed.). Aldhelmi Opera. MGH Scriptores. Auctores antiquissimi 15. Berlin, 1919. Scans available from the Digital MGH. Gwara, Scott (ed.), Aldhelmi Malmesbiriensis Prosa de virginitate: cum glosa latina atque anglosaxonica, 2 vols, Corpus Christianorum, Series Latina, 124, 124a (Turnhout: Brepols, 2001). Aldhelm: The Poetic Works. Trans. Michael Lapidge and James L. Rosier. Boydell & Brewer, 1984. ISBN 0-85991-146-2. Aldhelm: The Prose Works. Trans. Michael Lapidge and Michael Herren. D. S. Brewer, 1979.  ISBN 0-85991-041-5. The Riddles of Aldhelm. Text and translation by James Hall Pittman. Yale University Press, 1925.   References         Holweck, F.G.. A Biographical Dictionary of the Saints. St. Louis, MO: B. Herder Book Co., 1924. Lapidge, Michael. "The Career of Aldhelm."  Anglo-Saxon England 36 (2007): 15–69. Marenbon, John, "Les Sources du Vocabulaire d'Aldhelm" in Bulletin du Cange: Archivvm Latinitatis Medii Aevi MCMLXXVII- MCMLXXVIII. Tome XLI. E.J.Brill, Leiden. 1979. Orchard, Andy. The Poetic Art of Aldhelm. Cambridge University Press, 1994.  ISBN 0-521-45090-X. Walsh, Michael. A New Dictionary of Saints: East and West. London: Burns & Oates, 2007. ISBN 0-86012-438-X   External links     Codex Lambethanus 200, f. 68b Catholic Online Saints and Angels: St. Aldhelm Patron Saints Index: Aldhelm of Sherborne Prosopography of Anglo Saxon England entry for Aldhelm St Aldhelm's Obelisk dedicated in Poole, England
Alejandro Toledo      Alejandro Celestino Toledo Manrique (born 28 March 1946) is a politician who was President of Peru, from 2001 to 2006. He was elected in April 2001, defeating former President Alan García. Toledo came to international prominence after leading the opposition against President Alberto Fujimori, who held the presidency from 1990 to 2000. Early lifeToledo was born into an impoverished family of indigenous campesinos (peasants) of Quechua heritage. He was the eighth oldest of sixteen brothers and sisters, seven of whom died in childhood.  He was born in the village of Ferrer, Bolognesi, but registered in the nearby town of Cabana, Pallasca Province, Ancash Department.When Toledo was six years old, he and his family moved to the fishing town of Chimbote, a five-hour drive north of Lima. Toledo's father, a mason, claimed a plot of dusty land and built a home on it. The town had no electricity or running water, dirt streets, and open sewers.   As a child he worked shining shoes and selling newspapers and lottery tickets. When, at age 11, he finished grade school, his father expected him to leave school and get a job to support the family. With his teacher's encouragement, Toledo was able to continue his schooling by working nights and weekends, becoming the first person in his family to attend high school.  Toledo eventually found employment as a news correspondent for La Prensa in Chimbote, where he interviewed several high-ranking politicians.   Toledo's prospects improved when two Peace Corps volunteers, Joel Meister and Nancy Deeds, arrived in Chimbote looking for lodging and arrived at his family's door. The two Americans were drawn to Toledo by his "industriousness and charm," and his long conversations with them during the year that followed introduced Toledo to a world outside his small fishing village and inspired him to apply for a local civic group's scholarship to study in the United States. He was chosen to receive a one-year grant, and while in the United States, Deeds and Meister helped him get into the University of San Francisco's special program for non-English speakers.  Toledo completed the BA program in economics and business administration at USF by obtaining a partial soccer scholarship and working part-time pumping gas. He later attended Stanford University, earning a master's in Economics and the Economics of Human Resources, he then earned a PhD in the Economics of Human Resources in 1993 at the Stanford University School of Education.    Early careerFrom 1981 to 1983, Toledo directed the Institute for Economic and Labor Studies in Lima, a subdivision of the Ministry of Labor and Social Development. During the same period, he also served as Chairman of the Economic Advisory Committee to the President of the Central Reserve Bank and the Labor Minister. Throughout his academic and governmental career, Toledo worked as a consultant for various international organizations, including the United Nations, the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the International Labor Organization (ILO), and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). He led the 1989 UNDP/ILO mission for the evaluation of: “Impact of Macroeconomic Policies on Growth, Employment and Salaries,” in six Central American countries.  Toledo has also been a professor at ESAN, one of Peru's leading business schools, serving as its director from 1986 to 1991. From 1991 to 1994, he was an affiliated researcher in the field of international development at the Harvard Institute for International Development. He has also been a guest professor at the University of Waseda in Tokyo and at the Japan Foundation.    Presidential ElectionToledo entered politics as an independent candidate for the presidency (winning 3% of the vote) in the 1995 election in which Alberto Fujimori was ultimately re-elected. Despite his loss, the party he founded in 1994, Perú Posible, gained popularity and influence over the next few years. Toledo declared his intent to run again in the 2000 election and despite a constitutional controversy about his eligibility to serve a third term, Fujimori also announced his candidacy.Despite being a relatively low-profile politician, Toledo suddenly found himself the leader of the opposition to Fujimori's presidency.  Toledo promised to uphold and strengthen the market program that had been put in place, while also mitigating inequality issues attributed to it. He promised to pursue democratic reforms and reinvigorate Peru's social infrastructure. During the campaign, he promised to raise the wages of civil servants, which had been stagnant under Fujimori, and to create 400,000 jobs a year through programs designed to encourage agriculture, tourism, and small business.  Toledo repeatedly called for the expansion of investigations into government, including investigations into allegations that the Fujimori administration had stolen billions from government coffers. Racial-ethnic themes also echoed throughout the campaign. Toledo was running to become Peru's first indigenous president. He referred to himself as "the cholo" throughout his campaign, and many indigenous Peruvians hoped that as president he would bring greater attention to issues of importance to them. Toledo's background, engaging manner, and informal attitude made him an attractive candidate to both indigenous and non-indigenous Peruvians. Just minutes after the polls closed at 4:00 PM on April 9, 2000, major news networks rushed to announce that Toledo had garnered more votes than Fujimori. These announcements were based on projections from Peru's top polling firms, which base their numbers on exit polls.  The prominent pollsters quickly modified projections based on samples of actual vote counts from selected polling places, better known as the "quick count". Shortly after receiving news of Toledo's encouraging performance in the initial stage of the vote count, supporters gathered in the streets around Toledo's hotel room. An enthusiastic Alejandro Toledo walked out onto the balcony of his room wearing a red headband, reminiscent of ancient Inca warriors. He optimistically speculated that a first round victory might be within his grasp but still urged his supporters to wait for the results of the quick count. The second wave of quick count results reversed earlier projections, projecting a round one Fujimori plurality and possible majority. Fujimori had a projected lead of 48.73% to 41.03% later that evening. Fujimori was closing in on the 50% mark which would give him a victory in the first round, with no runoff necessary.  Allegations of fraud were made, and were not far-fetched. On the day preceding the election, Tranparencia, the national election observation organization, reported that it had received information concerning a web site with capabilities to hack into the ONPE (Oficina National de Procesos Electorales) computer system. Eduardo Stein also claimed that ONPE had made no provisions for OAS technicians to monitor the vote count system in real time. Toledo claimed that a fraud had been perpetrated; other opposition candidates agreed and joined protests led by Toledo.  Though "the U.S. State Department had supported Fujimori and his economic policies, it described the results of the 2000 elections as invalid."  Since no candidate had received a majority of the vote, a runoff was required, but Toledo refused to participate in a second round against Fujimori. He unsuccessfully petitioned to have the election annulled, and lobbied international organizations and foreign government to deny recognition to Fujimori's government. On July 28, 2000, Peruvian Independence Day, Fujimori began his third term as president.  Toledo led a group of protesters towards Congress. The massive demonstration was peaceful at first, but violence broke out and a powerful explosion led to the death of six people.  It was later discovered by the Peruvian Judiciary that the explosion had been planned and carried out by the National Intelligence Service, run by Vladimiro Montesinos, who had already been indicted on corruption and bribery charges. Montesinos had fled to Venezuela, where he hid for several months before being captured and brought back to Peru. The charges against Montesinos ranged from bribery to drug trafficking to arranging death squads.  But it was the release of the "Vladi-videos" that prompted retreat by Fujimori. The first of these incriminating videos showed Montesinos bribing a Congressman with US$15,000 to switch to Fujimori's camp. Mann, Stephanie (2006)Peru's Relations with Pacific Asia, Retrieved 27 June 2011. ISBN 978-3-8258-8820-6 In November 2000, amid growing allegations of fraud and corruption within his administration, Fujimori agreed to hold new elections in 2001, and not to stand as a candidate. While he was attending the APEC forum in Brunei, Fujimori's party lost control of the Congress.  Fujimori then flew to Japan, where he submitted his resignation and claimed Japanese citizenship. After the fall of Fujimori, the newly elected president of the Peruvian Congress, Valentín Paniagua, became interim president and oversaw the already planned new elections on May 29, 2001. Toledo won after a close run-off election against former President Alan García of the APRA party, with 52.23% of the vote, to Garcia’s 47.77%. Toledo thereby became the first South American President of indigenous descent to be democratically elected in five hundred years.  Presidency  High ExpectationsDuring his campaign, Toledo promised Peruvians higher wages, a fight against poverty, anti-corruption measures, higher pensions, more employment, military reform, development of tourism, and industrialization. As Pedro Pablo Kuczynski noted “Toledo comes after almost 30 years of either dictatorships or governments that weren't so democratic. People expect Toledo to solve all the problems of the last 30 years, which included an enormous increase in relative poverty."  Toledo's inability to fulfill many of these promises created widespread dissatisfaction. His approval ratings were consistently low throughout his presidency, sometimes sinking into single digits.   Toledo also promised open market free trade reforms, which reflected Peru's business interests while also promising to review Fujimori's privatization programs. Specifically, Toledo promised not to privatize any of Peru's public utilities. This promise, combined with lofty promises of reduced unemployment and poverty, caused Peru's rank and file to set the bar very high for his administration. Shortly after coming to office Toledo met with IMF officials and promised that he would raise $700 million in 2002, and almost one billion dollars in 2003, by selling state assets.   To compound his problems, President Toledo faced a devastating earthquake in his first year in office. This natural disaster left much of Peru devastated morally and fiscally. With many homes and businesses destroyed, economic ills were exacerbated.  Acuerdo NacionalIn November 2001, Toledo opened talks which concluded in the National Accord of July 22, 2002. In the accord, seven political parties and seven social organizations agreed upon a framework that would guide policy for the next twenty years. The accord set forth twenty-four policy goals divided into four categories: democracy and the rule of law, equity and social justice, economic competitiveness, and an institutional framework of efficiency, transparency, and decentralization. Initially, the accord opened up dialogue in Peru’s political arena, but within a year, the public considered it to be less effective than had been hoped. St. John, Ronald Bruce (2010). Toledo's Peru: Vision and Reality  Indigenous IssuesTouting his heritage throughout his campaign, Toledo continued the efforts begun by Paniagua, who had brought together experts and indigenous leaders to discuss the needs of indigenous people throughout the country. Toledo’s inauguration ceremony on Machu Picchu was attended by all the presidents of the neighboring Andean states who joined him in signing the “Declaration of Machu Picchu,” promising to protect indigenous rights. García, Maria Elena (2005) Making Indigenous Citizens Retrieved May 29, 2011. ISBN 978-0-8047-5015-8 Maria Elena García calls the years of Toledo’s presidency, a transition rife with new opportunities for indigenous people, noting the “reframed state-indigenous interactions” and “increase in NGO projects and social movements” and “proliferation of indigenous organizations.”   Toledo created and first lady Eliane Karp headed a new agency for indigenous and Afro-Peruvian affairs, CONOPA (Commission for Amazonian, Andean, and Afro-Peruvian Peoples). The agency was meant to establish a development agenda for indigenous communities, provide representation of indigenous interests within the government, and lead the way for multi-cultural constitutional reforms. Some critics viewed these actions as a state co-optation of indigenous identity, mockingly dubbing the agency the “Karp Commission.”  However, Oxfam's Martin Scurrah points out the agency's good work, noting that in addition to promoting a chapter on indigenous rights in the new constitution, Eliane Karp has "intervened on numerous occasions in support of or in defense of indigenous initiatives." As President, Toledo made it a priority to try to recover ancient Incan artifacts from Yale University's Peabody Museum of Natural History. Some art historians claimed that such artifacts, found at Machu Picchu, could help the Peruvian people to gain knowledge of their ancestry.He also brought serious attention to bilingual education in indigenous schools, creating a new and well-staffed division within the Ministry of Education devoted to the issue. This effort gives advocates greater autonomy and opportunity to influence policy and work towards institutionalizing bilingual education. Toledo's efforts at decentralization sought to give indigenous groups greater influence upon policy-making on a regional level. The first regional and local elections, held in November 2002, required that 15% of the candidates on the lists candidates in regions with an indigenous presence must have indigenous backgrounds. However, decentralization has been viewed critically by some, who claim that in dividing up regions, administrators have at times ignored the distinctive cultural and historical factors that define different areas. Diana Vinding (2003)The Indigenous World 2002-2003,  Retrieved May 30, 2011. ISBN 978-87-90730-74-1 In a speech to the Human Rights of Indigenous Peoples in Latin America, Toledo expressed disappointment at the growing disparity between the incomes of indigenous people and other citizens. Despite the growth achieved by the Peruvian economy, the poverty gap has widened between the upper and lower classes. Toledo mentions the reintegration of the indigenous populations into the Peruvian social and political system as a key to sustainability and economic growth.  Advocates of indigenous rights have also criticized some of Toledo's efforts to jump-start the economy through investments, such as his support for the Camisea natural-gas project and other projects that involved exploring or developing natural resources. These critics claim that companies buy land at unreasonable prices, force indigenous people off of land that is historically theirs, and exploit natural resources in ways that are harmful to communities and the environment. Peru is one of the largest producers of gold, silver, and zinc in Latin America, and some critics complain about the priority the Peruvian government gives to mining as opposed to industries like fishing and agriculture, with which indigenous peoples are more familiar. They note that mining companies may bring new jobs to rural areas, but that they are not jobs for which natives are well qualified.  Labor UnrestDespite unprecedented, strong, and consistent economic growth under his leadership, Toledo dealt with much labor unrest during his presidency as workers demanded higher wages and the fulfillment of campaign promises. The crisis underlined a basic flaw in Peru's economy as pointed out by The Economist, which noted that "some 70% of output falls within the grey or informal" economy, and thus escapes tax. Tax-collections, at below 12.1% of GDP, are stagnant, with most coming from a handful of large, formal companies. Evasion is widespread, particularly among better-paid independent professionals." Tax collections by Toledo's government could simply not cover the wages that had been promised to civil servants. Even as the Peruvian government was taking in too little money to pay civil servants, the country saw its cost of living increase dramatically during the early years of Toledo's administration. These hardships, combined with increasing unemployment and stagnant wages caused the general public to doubt that Toledo was living up to lofty campaign promises. By 2003, Toledo's approval rating had fallen bellow 10%, the lowest of any South American president at the time.  Social InitiativesToledo did implement some of his plans for investment in social infrastructure and institutions. The amount of paved roads increased by 20% during his presidency; medical attention to the poor doubled in rural areas, and public sector salaries increased (school teachers' pay rose by 87%) and over 100,000 new homes were built for poor Peruvians. "Análisis sobre mensaje a la nación de Alejandro Toledo" Retrieved 27 June 2011. By 2004, Peru had a far-reaching social safety net that included food programs serving 35 percent of the population, and work programs offering temporary employment to unskilled workers. The Cooperative Fund for Social Development funded projects to construct and improve schools, health clinics, rural roads, water and sanitation systems, and electric grids. Toledo placed food and infrastructure programs under the Ministry for Women and Social Development and urged that municipalities implement decentralization. Social safety-net spending in Peru remained well below the Latin American average under Toledo even as it covered a larger percentage of the population, which means that outlays were insufficient to lift many people up out of poverty.  EducationToledo inherited an educational system which had been plagued for decades by mediocrity, low completion rates, inadequate resources, and inequality between genders, classes, and races. Toledo launched Project Huascaran, which enabled primary and secondary-school classrooms to connect a nationwide computer network of learning systems. During his campaign, Toledo had promised to double teachers’ salaries, but ran into problems when the teachers unions successfully opposed an initiative to tie salary increases to improved skills and performance standards.  In 2002, Toledo declared an emergency in education, stating four objectives to respond to it:    Reverse the deterioration in quality of education Give priority to basic education emphasize teacher training and performance evaluate and upgrade schools Throughout his administration, enrollment rates in primary and secondary education remained high and private-school enrollment increased, but overall literacy and test scores improved only slightly. In an interview on his last day in office, Toledo expressed frustration that his administration had not done more to improve education.  HealthcareDuring his first year in office, Toledo replaced previous health-insurance programs aimed at the poor with a more comprehensive free insurance program, Seguro Integral de Salud (SIS). The program aimed to provide Peruvians without health insurance with improved access to heath care.  By the end of his term, SIS covered more than 11 million Peruvians living on the outskirts of cities or in rural areas. However, about a third of the country remained without health coverage. The program has been immensely popular. President García expanded the program, which has been praised by neoliberal reformers for extending coverage to indigenous people and women. They also note that it has addressed with considerable success the fact that Peruvian women’s healthcare costs are much higher than men’s owing to higher rates of illness and reproductive issues. The legislature continues to build upon SIS, using it as a basis for what many hope will someday be universal healthcare coverage for all Peruvians. Toledo also attempted to improve access to healthcare in the most remote places. His Juntos program awarded a monthly benefit to poor families who agreed to get vaccinations and screenings, attend school, and obtain birth registration documents. The Toledo administration also provided financial incentives to young doctors who were willing to spend the first few years of their practices in remote areas.  HousingPeru faced a major housing deficit in 2001, with the majority of its urban population living in slums. Toledo’s administration sought to improve access to affordable housing through subsidies, loans, down payments, land titling, and encouraging financial institutions to reach further down-market. Most of these efforts were grouped under the Fondo Mivivienda, which was program started in 1999.  DecentralizationUnder Toledo's predecessor, Fujimori, the governing authority in Peru was condensed and centralized.  A Fujimori-dominated congress passed a new constitution in 1993, which consolidated the bicameral legislature into a unicameral legislature with a single national district. Under Fujimori local governments retained minimal legal authority including fees for utilities, basic civil registries, and management of public spaces and markets.  Decentralization was among Toledo’s most successful institutional reforms. In addition to announcing regional elections upon his inauguration, he charged a Decentralization and Regionalization Commission with developing proposals. In 2002, a constitutional amendment was approved which established three levels of government: local, regional, and national. Over the next few years, the congress gradually passed on resources and responsibilities to the regional and municipal governments including food programs, social development projects, and health and education programs.  He divided the single district up, called for regional elections, and eliminated the centralist Ministry of the Presidency that had been instituted under Fujimori. J. Tyler Dickovick(2011) Decentralization and Recentralization in the Developing World. Retrieved June 29, 2011. ISBN 978-0-271-03790-5  However, when Peru Possible's rival political party APRA made significant gains in regional elections, the Toledo administration halted its decentralization program by withholding power in the areas of revenue and expenditure. This left many regionally elected governors confused as to how far their authority extended. Without strong fiscal plans to support his new policy of centralization, Toledo had to continue decentralizing power and recognizing more regions. Toledo continued to assert control of regional governments, however, by withholding funding. Toledo’s plan for decentralization enjoyed widespread popular support. Most of the opposition to his program came from, and most of the difficulty in implementing his proposals was owing to, politicians and bureaucratic agencies who were accustomed to a centralized form of government.  Fighting Terrorism and Drug TraffickingThe Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which had been implemented by interim president Paniagua, was tasked with examining largescale acts of violence and atrocities committed within Peru between 1980 and 2000, to assess responsibility and pave the way for reparations. The Commission's final report to President Toledo was issued in 2003, and concluded that approximately 69,000 people had been killed by the Shining Path and other extremist groups, the bulk of the victims being innocent peasants.  It was estimated that 54% of these victims were killed by the extremist guerrilla group Shining Path, 30% by the Peruvian Military and police forces, and the rest were by rural or peasant self-defense militias.  These investigations were financed by a portion of the US$360 million discovered in foreign accounts which had been stolen by Fujimori officials.  Toledo wasted no time in pursuing suspected terrorists, arresting 199 of them in 2002 alone. In late 2001, the Directorate against Terrorism reported that the Shining Path, a terrorist movement which has been active since the eighties, was organizing along new fronts and infiltrating protests, blocking highways, and organizing student marches. The government reacted by reestablishing five counterinsurgency bases, which soon assisted in destroying six Shining Path camps. But terrorist activity continued and in 2003, Toledo declared the first of several states of emergency due to the terrorist threat.  Toledo walked a thin line in responding to both U.S. pressure to severely limit coca-production and protests by coca farmers against the eradication of coca production in poor, rural areas, where the majority of the population is involved in that business. The presumed link between the Shining Path and narcotics trafficking was unclear, because the coca farmers gave most of their crops to drug traffickers who then paid the Shining Path to operate within certain regions. Recognizing the drug trade as a threat to regional security, Toledo sought to create a common Andean approach to the drug war. He saw that revenue from drug trafficking funded terrorist activities, but also that U.S. insistence on the eradication of coca crops failed to address the problem. Alternative crop programs were also being resisted by coca farmers who depended on the coca trade for their livelihood. At a meeting of the 19-member Rio group in May 2003, Toledo proposed developing a joint strategy to deal with drug trafficking, but pressure from Washington, which preferred bilateral efforts, helped kill the notion.  Foreign Relations The Toledo administration was unusually active in foreign policy. Its major goals were promoting democracy outside Peru, addressing the struggle against poverty, encouraging economic development in the borderlands, reducing arms spending in the region, strengthening relations with Asia-Pacific countries, and integrating with the Andean Community of Nations.  Peru also became an associate member of MERCOSUR, a free trade zone that would be established gradually. The objective was for signing nations to gradually build up an infrastructure that would ease trade with one another,to cooperate in the improvement of energy efficiency, and to commit to future agreements that would increase cross border investment by eliminating double taxation.  AsiaThe Toledo administration held freetrade agreement talks with Singapore and Thailand, came to an agreement with Thailand on air transport, and signed an extradition treaty with South Korea. Foreign Minister García-Sayan visited China and discussed support for multilateralism and strengthening the UN. In 2004 China declared Peru an official tourist destination, and in 2005 the countries concluded several trade agreements.  BoliviaToledo attended Evo Morales’ inauguration in  2006, indicating a willingness to work with his administration, but Morales joined his mentor, Hugo Chavez, in repeatedly making offensive comments about Toledo and his government, especially after the successful conclusion of Peru’s free trade agreement with the U.S., which soured official relations with Colombia.  Brazil In conducting Peru’s relations with Brazil, Toledo's goal was to reorient Peru from the Andean Community, toward the more economically active Brazil and MERCOSUR. In August 2003, Toledo met with President Lula. They committed to increased political and economic cooperation under the Initiative for Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America which invests  in large-scale, debt-heavy projects, aimed at developing 10 economic axes or hubs throughout South America. Construction projects, including roads, discussed. President Lula also agreed to allow Peru access to two surveillance systems which Brazil had developed in the Amazon Basin to target legal and illegal activity.  ColombiaConcern for security and trafficking led the Toledo administration to prioritize the reinforcement of its border with Colombia and the improvement of police coordination. In 2003, with increased private and UN investment in the area, the two countries agreed to establish an integrated frontier zone which treats air travel between border cities as domestic travel and simplifies customs and tariff procedures.  ChileMost of the Toledo administration dealings with Chile involved concern over the latter procurement of arms. Despite Toledo's repeated call for regional arms reductions, Chile continued purchasing arms, including 10 F-16 fighters from the U.S. and one hundred Leopard 2 tanks from Germany.  EcuadorWhile Peru and Ecuador had been at peace for years, President Toledo worked to solidify and build upon that peace. During a 2001 visit to Ecuador, Toledo expressed support for the Brasília Accords, agreed to the demilitarization of the two countries’ common border, advocated reduced military spending, and agreed to greater energy, transportation, and police cooperation. Toledo joined Ecuadorian President Noboa at the International Advisory Committee of the Binational Development Plan, where they called for greater investment in their region, with Toledo putting forth a detailed program for international assistance. Economic activity in the region subsequently improved as the demining of the border continued, construction projects were completed, and military forces were reduced. By 2006, investment in the area had reached $1.2 billion.  Venezuela Relations with Venezuela deteriorated during the latter half of the Toledo presidency owing to opposing philosophies and policies of Presidents Toledo and Chavez. The issues contributing to the tension between the two countries included Venezuela's shielding of Vladimiro Montesinos, Former Spy Chief Returned to Peru After Being Captured  Peru's support for democracy in Venezuela, and Venezuelan interference in Peruvian politics. (157) This included Chavez’s official endorsement, and unofficial financial backing of leftist candidate Ollanta Humala in Peru’s 2006 presidential race, which was soon seconded by President Morales.  United StatesPresident Toledo worked hard throughout his presidency on what became a very productive relationship with the U.S., and what Toledo described as a personal friendship with President Bush. He received lavish praise from the American president for his economic and domestic security policies. During a visit to Peru, Bush announced the establishment of an Andean Center of Excellence for Teacher Training, with a base in Peru, and a fellowship program to give Andean professionals access to education in information technology. In June 2002, the U.S. agreed to forgive $14 million of Peru's debt in exchange for a promise to invest $12 million in conservation projects. In September, Toledo secured a $300 million commitment from Bush to fund alternative-crop development in coca-producing areas. In 2003, the Peace Corps returned to Peru.  Peru opposed U.S. efforts most visibly in the War in Iraq, refusing to support the intervention in any international arena.  Peru - United States Trade Promotion Agreement The United States – Peru Trade Promotion Agreement ( ) is a bilateral free trade agreement, whose objectives are eliminating obstacles to trade, consolidating access to goods and services and fostering private investment in and between the United States and Peru. Besides commercial issues, it incorporates economic, institutional, intellectual property, labor and environmental policies, among others. The agreement was signed on April 12, 2006; ratified by the Peruvian Congress on June 28, 2006; by the U.S. House of Representatives on November 2, 2007 and by the U.S. Senate on December 4, 2007. The agreement was implemented on February 1, 2009. Peru looks to the agreement are to:  Consolidate and extend the trade preferences under ATPDEA Attract foreign investment Generate employment Enhance the country's competitiveness within the region Iincrease workers' income  Curb poverty levels Create and export sugar cane ethanol   The United States looks to the agreement to:  Improve access to goods and services Strengthen its investments Promote security and democracy Fight against drug trafficking  The U.S.-Peru agreement has faced criticism. In Peru, the treaty was championed by Toledo, and supported to different extents by former President Alan García and candidates Lourdes Flores and Valentín Paniagua. Current President Ollanta Humala has been its most vocal critic. Humala's Union for Peru won 45 of 120 seats in Congress in 2006, the largest share by a single party, prompting debate on ratification of the agreement before the new legislature was sworn in. Some Congressmen-elect interrupted the debate after forcibly entering Congress in an attempt to stop the agreement ratification. One controversial element of the agreement relates to land resources. Laura Carlsen, of the Center for International Policy, who is also a contributor to Foreign Policy in Focus notes that "Indigenous organizations warn that this ruling effectively opens up 45 million hectares to foreign investment and timber, oil, and mining exploitation." However, most of the criticism of the agreement has focused on its potential impact on Peru's agricultural sector. By planting crops to similar to those subsidized by the U.S., Peru faced a competitive disadvantage in the production of agricultural products because poor farming families with inadequate tools, technology and techniques may not be able to produce crops at low enough prices to export. In response to these concerns, Peruvian lawmakers created a Compensation Fund which directed $34 million per year to cotton, maize/corn, and wheat producers for a five-year period to help them adjust to the new competitive pressures.  Economic Policy Toledo’s economic policies can be described as neoliberal or strongly pro free-trade. He inherited a national economy which in the previous decade had experienced an unstable GDP with periods of growth and shrinkage, as well as fiscal deficits frequently amounting to over 2% of GDP. Inflation had not dropped below 23% until 1995 and was still feared by many. In response, Toledo developed policies which focused on fighting poverty, generating employment, decentralizing government, and modernizing the state.    Among Toledo’s initiatives designed to generate revenue and transform the economy were plans to privatize national industries. The first major effort of this kind was the $167 million sale of two state-owned electric companies. Protests in the city of Arequipa turned violent as Peruvians reacted with anger to the prospect of layoffs and higher priced electricity. They also recalled that billions of dollars earned from privatization under the Fujimori administration had ended up filling the president’s personal bank accounts. Toledo decided not to carry out the sale of electric companies, but promised to continue privatization efforts, which were a key provision of a deal struck with the International Monetary Fund. Toledo had promised to bring in US$700 million through privatization in 2001 and US$1 billion in 2002.  Although he failed to meet these goals, the IMF approved a $154 million disbursement to Peru in December 2002 and allowed the country to raise the fiscal deficit target in its agreement.  Page, Kogan (2003)Americas Review 2003/2004, Retrieved May 2011. ISBN 978-0-7494-4064-0 Although Toledo originally promised tax cuts, violent protests by civil servants prompted the increase in social sector spending that Toledo had also promised, which necessitated tax increases. To tackle tax reform in June 2003, he brought in Peru’s first female prime minister, Beatriz Merino who quickly submitted proposals to the congress. Among the suggestions were pay cuts for higher-paid public-sector officials, including a 30% salary reduction for Toledo himself, a 5% across-the-board cut for all agencies and ministries, tax increases on beer, cigarettes and fuel, and an extension of the 18% sales and value-added tax to, among other things, long-distance bus journeys and live entertainment.  The final package also included the elimination of tax breaks, the introduction of a minimum corporate tax, the closing of tax loopholes for the rich, and the strengthening of local government realestate tax regimes. During Toledo's five years as president, Peru's economy experienced 47 consecutive months of growth and grew at an average rate of 6% per year while inflation averaged 1.5% and the deficit sank as low as 0.2% of GDP. Between 2004 and 2006, employment grew at an average rate of 6%,  the percentage of people living in poverty fell, and food consumption by the poorest segments of the population rose dramatically.  Much of this growth has been credited to the free trade agreements signed with the United States, China, Thailand, Chile, Mexico, and Singapore.  In an attempt to increase remittances from Peruvians abroad, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs under Toledo sought to strengthen the link between Peruvian migrants and their homeland through the creation of advisory councils. The issue is especially important for a country which experienced a massive emigration of professionals under Fujimori and which still has 10% of its population living abroad. The councils were also part of an effort by the first Minister of Foreign Affairs, García Sayan, to professionalize the foreign service.  Post-Presidential NominationAfter his presidency, Toledo went to the United States, where he served as a Distinguished Scholar in Residence at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University, during the 2006-2008 academic years.  "Payne Distinguished Visiting Lecturer", CDDRL Visiting Scholar 2007-2009. Retrieved November 2010.  Toledo was named a Distinguished Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University from 2006 to 2009, and in 2007-2008 was a Payne Distinguished Visiting Lecturer at Stanford University's Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies and a CDDRL (Center on Democracy, Development and the Rule of Law) Visiting Scholar.  While at Stanford, Toledo founded and continues to serve as the President of the Global Center for Development and Democracy, based in Latin America, the United States, and the European Union which 'aims to help Peru and Latin American countries build institutional bases for greater stability, with a wide political commitment to democracy, that is decentralized and equal to all". In 2007, following the closing of media outlet RCTV in Venezuela, Toledo published an op-ed in the New York Times condemning the action of President Hugo Chavez’s government as a violation of free speech. Toledo called for intervention by the Organization of American States, citing its commitment to protecting the development of democratic institutions, including the press. He also called for "continent-wide solidarity" on the grounds that the repression of free speech in a country is felt beyond the country itself. He warned that if Venezuela were allowed to silence its press without repercussions, this would encourage similar repression in the rest of Latin America, because "[w]hen one voice is silenced, we all become mute. When one thought is eliminated, we all lose some awareness. And when a space for the expression of ideas becomes closed, we all become trapped in the dungeons of dictatorship." In 2009, Toledo joined the Brookings Institution as a nonresident senior fellow. His works on the Latin America Initiative, a joint effort of the Global Economy and Development and Foreign Policy programs at Brookings. The initiative focuses on the most critical economic, political and social issues facing the region. Research activities are concerned with a wide range of topics, including the challenges that a changing world economy poses for Latin America, the impact of organized crime on democratic institutions and economic prosperity, trade and investment policies, strategies to tackle poverty and inequality, combating climate change, and Cuba's political transition. Toledo is also a member of the United Nations Steering Committee on the Human Development Report for Latin America, a member of the Club of Madrid, and a member of the International Board of Governors of the Peres Center for Peace in Israel.  Friends of Israel InitiativeIn 2010, Toledo joined the Spanish Prime Minister, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate David Trimble, Italian philosopher Marcello Pera, former United States Ambassador to the United Nations John Bolton, British historian Andrew Roberts, and others in forming the Friends of Israel Initiative. The project’s aim is to counter efforts to delegitimize the State of Israel and its right to live in peace within safe and defensible borders. The initiative consists of non-Jewish members who want Israel to continue to be accepted as part of the western world and who recognize it as a full-fledged democracy with the right to defend itself. In a 2011 article entitled "How Not to have a Palestinian State," Toledo and his co-writers argued that Obama's call for a return to talks based on the pre-1967 boundaries is a "clumsily concealed delegitimization device," Members of the Friends of Israel Initiative, "How not to have a Palestinian State," The Jerusalem Post, July 14, 2011,    as Palestine does not meet the internal and external requirements to become a state. The only way forward, the argued, is not unilateral action by the UN General assembly but a bilateral agreement between the Palestinians and the Israelis, in which each party agrees to recognize the other as a legitimate state.  2011 ElectionIn December 2010, Toledo announced his candidacy in the 2011 presidential election. Telling the Peruvian Times that "Garcia (the incumbent) is governing for the rich and not the poor", he said that when he left office, with 1 sol (approximately $0.34) bough 10 loaves bread; now it bought you five. "President Alan García (must) realize that Peru is much greater, much deeper, more generous and more warlike than the rich friends that surround him.”  The general election, which took place on April 10, 2011, Toledo won 15.62% of the vote putting him behind leftist former army officer Ollanta Humala (with 31.75%), Keiko Fujimori, daughter of the former president (with 23.5%), and Pedro Pablo Kuczynski (with 18.52%), and ahead of Luis Castaneda (with 9.84%).   After the initial round, Fujimori received the support of candidate and former president Alan García, while Toledo supported Humala, calling him the lesser of two evils.  Oppenheimer, Andres. 06 June 2011. "Humala won't be a Chavez--for now." The Miami Herald.  However, Toledo’s support came with conditions, and he threatened to mobilize protests if Humala’s presidency did not live up to Toledo’s standards in terms of protecting democratic institutions, human rights, and stimulating the economy.  Just before the election, an email was released revealing that the socialist president of Venezuela, Hugo Chavez, had given financial support to Humala's 2006 campaign. It also emerged that Humala's wife, Nadine Heredia, had been well-paid for consulting work at a pro-Chavez newspaper.  In the final tally, Humala won 51.6% of the vote to Fujimori's 48.4%.  The day after the final vote, the Peruvian stock market plunged out of concern for the state of Peru's neo-liberal economic policies. Drawing on his close relations with Evo Morales, President-elect Humala visited Bolivia shortly after the election and suggested the possibility of reunification of the two countries, a proposal which Toledo explicitly rejected, warning that he would not “allow Peru to become another Venezuela or Nicaragua.”  Amidst worries that Humala's election represented a shift too far to the left, Peru Posible, under the leadership of Toledo, announced the month after the election that its members would not accept ministerial positions within the administration and would limit its support of Humala's government to backing on some issues in the Congress.   Relationship with the pressFrom the beginning of Toledo’s presidency, the press took an aggressive stance, scrutinizing the personal and public lives of Toledo and his advisors. Many news outlets were determined to expose corruption in a way that had not been possible under the Fujimori administration. Others wished to prove their independence from the government, which had controlled the press under Fujimori. Ironically, it was Toledo's commitment to maintaining a free press that allowed these attacks to occur. Charges of corruption, nepotism, and graft aimed at Toledo, his family, members of his administration and fellow PP members plagued his presidency. These stories led to many resignations and were the most significant reason forToledo's low approval ratings. Those ratings bottomed out in 2004, following the resignation of his Minister of Agriculture.  Recognition In 2006, UCSD's Institute of the Americas honored President Toledo with its Award for Democracy and Peace for his efforts in promoting economic growth and strengthening democracy.  "It is the force of his personality that has led this country to understand that in this globalized world, there is no alternative to regional integration, to free trade, to sane economic policies," said Jeffrey Davidow, the institute's president. Toledo has received honorary doctorates from University of Winnipeg, "Honorary Doctorate Alejandro Toledo".  Los Andes Peruvian University,  "Honoris Causa degree - Alejandro Toledo"  and 50 other prestigious universities around the world—for a total of 52. He has lectured in more than thirty countries on issues of poverty, economic growth, and democracy, as well as on the benefits of human-capital investment.July 28, 2011 was the tenth anniversary of Toledo's inauguration, an event catalogued in the Associated Press's "Highlights in History" for that day. In October 2011, Tbilisi State University awarded an honorary doctorate to Toledo "for his special role in establishing and developing relations between Peru and Georgia." Despite the largely negative press coverage of his presidency, many of Toledo's harshest critics recognize the high premium that Toledo put on democratic processes and safeguards. In recognition of his efforts to preserve the freedom of the press Enrique Zileri, President of the Peruvian Press Council, affirmed in May 2003 that there were no problems with press freedom in Peru. In July 2010, the United States Senate honored President Toledo for his “policies which contributed immensely to the improving Peruvian economy” and “helped make great strides in the areas of education, healthcare, and poverty-reduction.” The resolution was proposed and read in Congress by Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York.  PublicationsAmong Toledo's publications are works on economic growth and structural reforms. His latest book, Las Cartas sobre la Mesa (The Cards on the Table), recounts his political career and the founding of Perú Posible.    Cartas Sobre la Mesa, Instituto de Investigacion para el Desarrollo, segunda edicion, 2003, Lima, Peru. “The Challenge of Growth and Social Investment in the 90’s” (Chap. 1), Co- author in Alessandro Pio, Economic Adjustment and Social Development: Complementary or Conflict, Milan, Italy, ISLA, Insituto di Economia “Ettore Bocconi”, Universidad L. Bocconi, E.G.E.A., SPA, 1992. The Other Faces of Informal Society (Ed. with Alain Chanlat), Lima, IDE/ESAN and HEC (Ecole de Hautes Etudes Commerciales), University of Montreal, Canada. September 1991. Peru and Latin America in Crisis: How to Finance Growth (editor), Instituto de Desarrollo Economico, ESAN, Lima, Peru. (Second Edition, 1990). Economic Stabilization and social adjustment: evaluation of the first 90 days Peru Economic Program of 1990); technical forum  (editor) Lima, ESAN/IDE, December 1990. “Can Education Policy Equalize Income Distribution in Latin America? The cases of Brazil, Mexico and Peru” (with M. Carnoy, I. Velloso, and J. Lobo). Saxon House, England, 1979.   Honours  Foreign honours    : Grand Cross of the Order of Saint-Charles (21 November 2003)     See also  Politics of Peru   Footnotes  Further reading  St. John, Ronald Bruce. Toledo's Peru: Vision and Reality  (University Press of Florida; 2010) 253 pages   External links   www.AlejandroToledo.org Extended bio and presidential tenure, by CIDOB Foundation (in Spanish) Alejandro Toledo: President of Peru Peace Corps: Alejandro Toledo Alejandro Toledo's commencement speech at Stanford Presentation by Alejandro Toledo about Economic Growth and Poverty Eradication - Feb 2007 "From president of Peru to just Palo Alto guy" by Tyler Bridges in San Francisco Chronicle February 11, 2007
Aleksandr Lyapunov   Aleksandr Mikhailovich Lyapunov ( ,  ;   – November 3, 1918) was a Russian mathematician, mechanician and physicist. His surname is sometimes romanized as Ljapunov, Liapunov or Ljapunow.Lyapunov is known for his development of the stability theory of a dynamical system, as well as for his many contributions to mathematical physics and probability theory. Biography Early lifeLyapunov was born in Yaroslavl, Russian Empire. His father Mikhail Vasilyevich Lyapunov (1820–1868) was an astronomer and a head of the Demidovski lyceum. His brother, Sergei Lyapunov, was a gifted composer and pianist. In 1863, M. V. Lyapunov retired from his scientific career and relocated his family to his wife's estate at Bolobonov, in the Simbirsk province (now Ulyanovsk Oblast). After the death of his father in 1868, Aleksandr Lyapunov was educated by his uncle R. M. Sechenov, brother of the physiologist Ivan Mikhailovich Sechenov. At his uncle's family, Lyapunov studied with his distant cousin Natalia Rafailovna, who became his wife in 1886. In 1870, his mother moved with her sons to Nizhny Novgorod, where he started the third class of the gymnasium. He graduated from the gymnasium with distinction in 1876.  Education In 1876 Lyapunov entered the Physico-Mathematical faculty of the University of Saint Petersburg, but after one month he transferred to the Mathematics department of the university.Among the Saint Petersburg professors of mathematics were Chebyshev and his students Aleksandr Nikolaevich Korkin and Yegor Ivanovich Zolotarev. Lyapunov wrote his first independent scientific works under the guidance of the professor of mechanics, D. K. Bobylev. In 1880 Lyapunov received a gold medal for a work on hydrostatics. This was the basis for his first published scientific works On the equilibrium of a heavy body in a heavy fluid contained in a vessel of a fixed form and On the potential of hydrostatic pressure. Lyapunov completed his university course in 1880, two years after Andrey Markov who had also graduated at Saint Petersburg University. Lyapunov would maintain a scientific contact with Markov during all his life.In 1884 Lyapunov defended his Master's thesis On the stability of ellipsoidal forms of equilibrium of rotating fluids. This theme was suggested to him by Chebyshev, who had already suggested it to other students of his, such as Zolotarev and Sofia Vasilyevna Kovalevskaya. The thesis was publicized in 1885 in the Bulletin Astronomique. It was fully translated in French in 1904 and attracted the attention of mathematicians, physicists and astronomers in Europe.  Teaching and researchIn 1892 Lyapunov defended his doctoral thesis The general problem of the stability of motion.  The thesis was defended in Moscow University on September 12, 1892, with Nikolai Zhukovsky and V. B. Mlodzeevski as opponents. This dissertation was, as with the master's, also translated into French. The next year Lyapunov became a full professor at Kharkiv University. In 1895 Lyapunov became privatdozent and was proposed to accept the chair of mechanics at Kharkiv University, where he went the same year.About the initial stay at Kharkiv, Lyapunov writes in his autobiography: His student and collaborator, Vladimir Steklov, recalled his first lecture in the following way: "A handsome young man, almost of the age of the other students, came before the audience, where there was also the old Dean, professor Levakovsky, who was respected by all students. After the Dean had left, the young man with a trembled voice started to lecture a course on the dynamics of material points, instead of a course on dynamical systems. This subject was already known to the students from the lectures of professor Delarue. But what Lyapunov taught us was new to me and I had never seen this material in any textbook. All antipathy to the course was immediately blown to dust. From that day students would show Lyapunov a special respect."  Later yearsLyapunov returned to Saint Petersburg in 1902, after being elected acting member of the Academy of Science as well as ordinary professor in the Faculty of Applied Mathematics of the university. The position had been left vacant by the death of his former teacher, Chebyshev. Not having any teaching obligations, this allowed Lyapunov to focus on his studies and in particular he was able to bring to a conclusion the work on the problem of Chebyshev with which he started his scientific career.In 1908 he took part to the Fourth International Mathematical Congress in Rome. He also participated in the publication of Euler's selected works: he was an editor of the volumes 18 and 19. By the end of June 1917, Lyapunov traveled with his wife to his brother's place in Odessa. Lyapunov's wife was suffering from tuberculosis so they moved following her doctor's orders. She died on October 31, 1918. The same day, Lyapunov shot himself in the head, and three days later he died.  Work Lyapunov contributed to several fields, including differential equations, potential theory, dynamical systems and probability theory. His main preoccupations were the stability of equilibria and the motion of mechanical systems, the model theory for the stability of uniform turbulent liquid, and the study of particles under the influence of gravity. His work in the field of mathematical physics regarded the boundary value problem of the equation of Laplace. In the theory of potential, his work from 1897 On some questions connected with Dirichlet's problem clarified several important aspects of the theory. His work in this field is in close connection with the work of Steklov. Lyapunov developed many important approximation methods. His methods, which he developed in 1899, make it possible to define the stability of sets of ordinary differential equations. He created the modern theory of the stability of a dynamic system. In the theory of probability, he generalised the works of Chebyshev and Markov, and proved the Central Limit Theorem under more general conditions than his predecessors. The method he used for the proof found later widespread use in probability theory. Like many mathematicians, Lyapunov preferred to work alone and communicated mainly with few colleagues and close relatives. He usually worked late, four to five hours at night, sometimes the whole night. Once or twice a year he visited the theatre, or went to some concert. He had many students. He was an honorary member of many universities, an honorary member of the Academy in Rome and a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences in Paris.  Selected publications  1884, On the stability of ellipsoidal figures of equilibrium of a rotating fluid (in Russian) 1892, General problem of the stability of motion (in Russian) 1897, Sur certaines questions qui se rattachent au problème de Dirichlet 1901, Nouvelle forme du théorème sur la limite de probabilité 1901, Sur un théorème du calcul des probabilités 1902, Sur une série dans la théorie des équations différentielles linéaires du second ordre à coefficients périodiques 1903, Recherches dans la théorie de la figure des corps célestes 1904, Sur l'équation de Clairaut et les équations plus générales de la théorie de la figure des planètes   See also  Lyapunov stability Lyapunov function Lyapunov exponent Lyapunov's central limit theorem Lyapunov's condition Lyapunov equation Lyapunov fractal Lyapunov time Lyapunov–Malkin theorem   Notes  References                 External links        Ляпунов Александр Михайлович  at www. mathsoc.spb. ru (in Russian) Ляпунов Александр Михайлович (1857-1918)  at www.spbu. ru (in Russian) Ляпунов Александр Михайлович  at www-mechmath. univer. kharkov. ua (in Russian) High Anxieties - The Mathematics of Chaos BBC documentary directed by David Malone of which a part looks at Lyapunov's work on turbulence.
Alex Haley   Alexander Murray Palmer Haley (August 11, 1921 – February 10, 1992)  was an African-American writer. He is best known as the author of Roots: The Saga of an American Family and the co-author of The Autobiography of Malcolm X.    Early lifeHaley was born in Ithaca, New York, on August 11, 1921, and was the oldest of three brothers and a sister. Haley lived with his family in Henning, Tennessee, before he returned to Ithaca with his family when he was five years old. Haley's father was a professor of agriculture at Alabama A&M University. The younger Haley always spoke proudly of his father and the obstacles of racism he had overcome. Alex Haley was enrolled at Alcorn State University at age 15. Two years later he returned to his father and stepmother to inform them of his withdrawal from college. Simon Haley felt that Alex needed discipline and growth and convinced his son to enlist in the military when he turned 18. On May 24, 1939, Alex Haley began his twenty-year career with the Coast Guard.He enlisted as a mess attendant and then became a Petty Officer Third Class in the rate of Steward, one of the few rates open to African Americans at that time.  His Coast Guard service number was 212-548.  It was during his service in the Pacific theater of operations that Haley taught himself the craft of writing stories. It is said that during his enlistment he was often paid by other sailors to write love letters to their girlfriends. He talked of how the greatest enemy he and his crew faced during their long sea voyages wasn't the Japanese but boredom. After World War II, Haley was able to petition the Coast Guard to allow him to transfer into the field of journalism, and by 1949 he had become a Petty Officer First Class in the rating of Journalist. He later advanced to Chief Petty Officer and held this grade until his retirement from the Coast Guard in 1959.  He was the first Chief Journalist in the Coast Guard, the rating having been expressly created for him in recognition of his literary ability.   Haley's awards and decorations from the Coast Guard include the American Defense Service Medal (with "Sea" clasp), American Campaign Medal, Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal, European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal, World War II Victory Medal, Coast Guard Good Conduct Medal (with 1 silver and 1 bronze service star), Korean Service Medal, National Defense Service Medal, United Nations Service Medal, and the Coast Guard Expert Marksmanship Medal.  Writing careerAfter retiring from the Coast Guard, Haley began his writing career, and eventually became a senior editor for Reader's Digest. Playboy magazineHaley conducted the first interview for Playboy magazine. The interview, with Miles Davis, appeared in the September 1962 issue. In the interview, Davis candidly spoke about his thoughts and feelings on racism and it was that interview which set the tone for what became a significant feature of the magazine. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Playboy Interview with Haley was the longest he ever granted to any publication. Throughout the 1960s, Haley was responsible for some of the magazine's most notable interviews, including an interview with American Nazi Party leader George Lincoln Rockwell, who agreed to meet with Haley only after Haley, in a phone conversation, assured him that he was not Jewish. Haley remained calm and professional during the interview, even though Rockwell kept a handgun on the table throughout it. Haley also interviewed Muhammad Ali, who spoke about changing his name from Cassius Clay. Other interviews include Jack Ruby's defense attorney Melvin Belli, Sammy Davis, Jr., Jim Brown, Johnny Carson, and Quincy Jones. He completed a memoir of Malcolm X just weeks before Malcolm X was assassinated in February 1965. The Autobiography of Malcolm XThe Autobiography of Malcolm X, published in 1965, was Haley's first book.  It describes the trajectory of Malcolm X's life from street criminal to national spokesman for the Nation of Islam to his conversion to Sunni Islam. It also outlines Malcolm X's philosophy of black pride, black nationalism, and pan-Africanism. Haley wrote an epilogue to the book summarizing the end of Malcolm X's life, including his assassination in New York's Audubon Ballroom.Haley ghostwrote The Autobiography of Malcolm X based on more than 50 in-depth interviews he conducted with Malcolm X between 1963 and the activist's February 1965 assassination.  The two men first met in 1960 when Haley wrote an article about the Nation of Islam for Reader's Digest. They met again when Haley interviewed Malcolm X for Playboy. The first interviews for the autobiography frustrated Haley. Rather than talking about his own life, Malcolm X spoke about Elijah Muhammad, the leader of the Nation of Islam. Haley's reminders that the book was supposed to be about Malcolm X, not Muhammad or the Nation of Islam, angered the activist. After several meetings, Haley asked Malcolm X to tell him something about his mother. That question began the process of Malcolm X describing his life story.  The Autobiography of Malcolm X has been a consistent best-seller since its 1965 publication.  The New York Times reported that six million copies of the book had been sold by 1977.    In 1998, Time named The Autobiography of Malcolm X one of the ten most influential nonfiction books of the 20th century. In 1966, Haley received the Anisfield-Wolf Book Award for The Autobiography of Malcolm X. Super Fly T.N.T.In 1973, Haley wrote his only screenplay, Super Fly T.N.T.. The film starred and was directed by Ron O'Neal. RootsIn 1976, Haley published Roots: The Saga of an American Family, a novel based on his family's history, starting with the story of Kunta Kinte, who was kidnapped in The Gambia in 1767 and transported to the Province of Maryland to be sold as a slave. Haley claimed to be a seventh-generation descendant of Kunta Kinte, and Haley's work on the novel involved ten years of research, intercontinental travel and writing. He went to the village of Juffure, where Kunta Kinte grew up and which is still in existence, and listened to a tribal historian tell the story of Kinte's capture.  Haley also traced the records of the ship, The Lord Ligonier, which he said carried his ancestor to America.Haley has stated that the most emotional moment of his life occurred on September 29, 1967, when he stood at the site in Annapolis, Maryland where his ancestor had arrived from Africa in chains exactly 200 years before. A memorial depicting Haley reading a story to young children gathered at his feet has since been erected in the center of Annapolis.Roots was eventually published in 37 languages, and Haley won a Special Award for the work in 1977 from the Pulitzer Board. The same year, Roots was adapted into a popular television miniseries by ABC. The serial reached a record-breaking 130 million viewers. Roots emphasized that African Americans have a long history and that not all of that history is necessarily lost, as many believed. Its popularity also sparked an increased public interest in genealogy. In 1979, ABC aired the sequel miniseries Roots: The Next Generations, which continued the story of Kunta Kinte's descendants, concluding with Haley's arrival in Juffure. Haley was portrayed (at various ages) by future soap opera actor Kristoff St. John, The Jeffersons actor Damon Evans, and Tony Award winner James Earl Jones.Haley was briefly a "writer in residence" at Hamilton College in Clinton, New York, where he began work on Roots. He enjoyed spending time at a local bistro called "The Savoy" in Rome, New York, where he would sometimes pass the time listening to the piano player. Today, there is a special table in honor of Haley with a painting of Haley writing "Roots" on a yellow legal tablet.Genealogists have since disputed Haley's research and conclusions.  In addition, Harold Courlander, in 1978, filed suit in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York, charging that Alex Haley, the author of Roots, had copied 81 passages from his novel, The African.    Courlander's pre-trial memorandum in the copyright infringement law suit stated:  "Defendant Haley had access to and substantially copied from The African.  Without The African, Roots would have been a very different and less successful novel, and indeed it is doubtful that Mr. Haley could have written Roots without the African....  Mr. Haley copied language, thoughts, attitudes, incidents, situations, plot and character." In his expert witness report submitted to the federal court in support of Courlander's claim, professor of English Michael Wood of Columbia University, stated: After a five-week trial in the federal district court, Courlander and Haley settled the case with a financial settlement and a statement that "Alex Haley acknowledges and regrets that various materials from The African by Harold Courlander found their way into his book Roots." During the trial, presiding U.S. District Court Judge Robert J. Ward stated: "Copying there is, period."  In a later interview with BBC Television, Judge Ward said that Haley had "perpetrated a hoax on the public". Throughout the trial, Alex Haley maintained that he had not read The African before writing Roots. Shortly after the trial, however, a minority studies teacher at Skidmore College, Joseph Bruchac III, came forward and swore in an affidavit that he had discussed The African with Haley in 1970 or 1971 and had, in fact, given his own personal copy of The African to Haley. This event took place a good number of years prior to the publication of Roots.  Later years In the late 1970s, Haley began working on a second historical novel based on another branch of his family, traced through his grandmother Queen—the daughter of a black slave woman and her white master. Haley died in Seattle, Washington, of a heart attack and was buried beside his childhood home in Henning, Tennessee, with the story unfinished. At his request, it was finished by David Stevens and was published as Alex Haley's Queen. It was subsequently made into a movie in 1993.Late in his life, Haley had acquired a small farm in Norris, Tennessee, adjacent to the Museum of Appalachia, with the intent of making it his home. After his death, the property was sold to the Children's Defense Fund (CDF), which calls it the "Alex Haley Farm" and uses it as a national training center and retreat site. An abandoned barn on the farm property was rebuilt as a traditional cantilevered barn, using a design by architect Maya Lin. The building now serves as a library for the CDF.  Awards and recognition The main galley at the U.S. Coast Guard Training Center Petaluma at Petaluma, CA is named "Haley Hall" in his honor. In 1999, the U.S. Coast Guard honored Haley by naming the cutter Alex Haley after him.In 1977, he was awarded the Spingarn Medal from the NAACP for his exhaustive research and literary skill combined in Roots.. Haley was posthumously awarded the Korean War Service Medal from the government of South Korea ten years after his death. This medal, created in 1951, was not authorized to be worn by U.S. Armed Forces personnel until 1999.The characters Alex and Haley Dunphy on Modern Family are named after him.  Other criticismIn addition to the charges of plagiarism, the accuracy of those aspects of Roots which Haley claimed to be true has also been challenged.  Although Haley acknowledged the novel was primarily a work of fiction, he did claim that he had identified his actual ancestor in the person of Kunta Kinte, an African taken from the village of Jufureh in what is now The Gambia. According to Haley, Kunta Kinte was sold into slavery, where he was given the name Toby, and, while in the service of a slavemaster named John Waller, went on to have a daughter named Kizzy, Haley's great-great-great grandmother. Haley also claimed to have identified the specific slave ship and the actual voyage on which Kunta Kinte was transported from Africa to North America in 1767. However, genealogist Elizabeth Shown Mills and historian Gary B. Mills, both specialists in African-American research, revisited Haley's research and concluded that those claims of Haley's were false.   According to the Millses, the slave named Toby who was owned by John Waller could be definitively shown to have been in North America as early as 1762. They also reported, among other findings, that Toby died years prior to the supposed date of birth of his daughter Kizzy. There have also been suggestions that Kebba Kanji Fofana, the amateur griot  in Jufureh, who, during Haley's visit there, confirmed the tale of the disappearance of Kunta Kinte, had been coached to relate such a story.   To date, Haley's work remains a notable exclusion from the Norton Anthology of African-American Literature, despite Haley's status as history's best-selling African-American author. Harvard University professor Dr. Henry Louis Gates, Jr., one of the anthology's general editors, has denied that the controversies surrounding Haley's works are the reason for this exclusion. Nonetheless, Dr. Gates has acknowledged the doubts surrounding Haley's claims about Roots, saying, "Most of us feel it's highly unlikely that Alex actually found the village whence his ancestors sprang. Roots is a work of the imagination rather than strict historical scholarship."  Recordings  Alex Haley Tells the Story of His Search for Roots (1977) - 2-LP recording of a two-hour lecture Haley gave at the University of Pennsylvania. Released by Warner Bros. Records (2BS 3036).   Collection of Alex Haley's personal worksThe University of Tennessee Libraries, in Knoxville, Tennessee, maintains a collection of Alex Haley's personal works in its Special Collections Department. The works contain notes, outlines, bibliographies, research, and legal papers documenting Haley's Roots through 1977. Of particular interest are the items showing Harold Courlander's lawsuit against Haley, Doubleday & Company, and various affiliated groups.  References  External links     Alex Haley documentary biography Biography   The Kunta Kinte - Alex Haley Foundation Coast Guard cutter named after Alex Haley Roots tribute page Alex Haley's Gravesite Alex Haley's Playboy Interview with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Alex Haley's Playboy Interview with Miles Davis Official Roots: 30th Anniversary Edition website Pace, Eric. "Alex Haley, 70, Author of 'Roots,' Dies," The New York Times, February 11, 1992. Alex Palmer Haley:A Leading African-American Novelist and Genealogist
Alexander Alekhine       Alexander Alexandrovich Alekhine, PhD (  March 24, 1946) ( ,  ) When he became a French citizen, "Alekhine" became the correct way to spell his name in the Latin alphabet. He became angry when Russians sometimes pronounced the ⟨е⟩ ye of Alekhin as ⟨ё⟩ yo,  , which he regarded as a Yiddish distortion of his name, and insisted that the correct Russian pronunciation was  "Al-YEH-khin" . See     was the fourth World Chess Champion. He is often considered one of the greatest chess players ever.By the age of twenty-two, he was already among the strongest chess players in the world. During the 1920s, he won most of the tournaments in which he played. In 1927, he became the fourth World Chess Champion by defeating Capablanca, widely considered invincible, in what would stand as the longest chess championship match held until 1985.In the early 1930s, Alekhine dominated tournament play and won two top-class tournaments by large margins. He also played first board for France in five Chess Olympiads, winning individual prizes in each (four medals and a brilliancy prize). Alekhine offered Capablanca a rematch on the same demanding terms that Capablanca had set for him, and negotiations dragged on for years without making much progress. Meanwhile, Alekhine defended his title with ease against Bogoljubov in 1929 and 1934. He was defeated by Euwe in 1935, but regained his crown in the 1937 rematch. His tournament record, however, remained uneven, and rising young stars like Keres, Fine, and Botvinnik threatened his title. Negotiations for a title match with Keres or Botvinnik were halted by the outbreak of World War II in Europe in 1939. Negotiations with Botvinnik for a world title match were proceeding in 1946 when Alekhine died in Portugal, in unclear circumstances.Alekhine is known for his fierce and imaginative attacking style, combined with great positional and endgame skill. Statistical rating systems differ about his strength relative to other players, giving him rankings between fourth and eighteenth in their "all-time" lists. Alekhine is highly regarded as a chess writer and theoretician, producing innovations in a wide range of chess openings, and giving his name to Alekhine's Defence and several other opening variations. He also composed some endgame studies. Biography Early lifeAlekhine was born into a wealthy family in Moscow, Russia on October 31, 1892.     His father Alexander Ivanovich Alekhine was a landowner and Privy Councilor to the conservative legislative Fourth Duma. Denker 1995  His mother, Anisya Ivanovna Alekhina (born Prokhorova), was the daughter of a rich industrialist. Alekhine was first introduced to chess by his mother, and older brother, Alexei, and an older sister, Varvara (Barbara).   Early chess career (1902–14) Alekhine's first known game was from a correspondence chess tournament that began on December 3, 1902, when he was ten years old. He participated in several correspondence tournaments, sponsored by the chess magazine Shakhmatnoe Obozrenie ("Chess Review"), in 1902–1911. In 1907, Alexander played his first over-the-board tournament, the Moscow chess club's Spring Tournament. Later that year, Alexander tied for 11th–13th in the club's Autumn Tournament; his older brother, Alexei, tied for 4th–6th place. In 1908, Alexander won the club's Spring Tournament, at the age of fifteen.  In 1909, he won All-Russian Amateur Tournament in Saint Petersburg. For the next few years, he played in increasingly stronger tournaments, some of them outside Russia. At first he had mixed results, but by the age of sixteen he had established himself as one of Russia's top players. Fine 1952  He played first board in two friendly team matches: St. Petersburg Chess Club vs. Moscow Chess Club in 1911 and Moscow vs. St. Petersburg in 1912 (both drew with Eugene Znosko-Borovsky).  By the end of 1911, Alekhine moved to St. Petersburg, where he entered the Imperial Law School for Nobles. By 1912, he was the strongest chess player in the St. Petersburg Chess Society. In March 1912, he won the St. Petersburg Chess Club Winter Tournament. In April 1912, he won the 1st Category Tournament of the St. Petersburg Chess Club.  In January 1914, Alekhine won his first major Russian tournament, when he tied for first place with Aron Nimzowitsch in the All-Russian Masters Tournament at St. Petersburg. Afterwards, they drew in a mini-match for first prize (they both won a game). Khalifman 2002  Alekhine also played several matches in this period, and his results showed the same pattern: mixed at first but later consistently good. Top-level grandmaster (1914–27)In April–May 1914, another major St. Petersburg 1914 chess tournament was held in the capital of the Russian Empire, in which Alekhine took third place behind Emanuel Lasker and José Raúl Capablanca. By some accounts, Tsar Nicholas II conferred the title of "Grandmaster of Chess" on each of the five finalists (Lasker, Capablanca, Alekhine, Tarrasch, and Marshall). Chess historian Edward Winter has questioned this, stating that the earliest known sources that support this story are an article by Robert Lewis Taylor in the June 15, 1940 issue of The New Yorker and Marshall's autobiography My 50 Years of Chess (1942). Winter 1999, p.315-316  Winter 2003, p.177-178   Alekhine's surprising success made him a serious contender for the World Chess Championship.  Whether or not the title was formally awarded to him, "Thanks to this performance, Alekhine became a grandmaster in his own right and in the eyes of the audience."  In July 1914, Alekhine tied for first with Marshall in Paris. Soltis 1994  World War I and post-revolutionary RussiaIn July–August 1914, Alekhine was leading an international Mannheim tournament, the 19th DSB Congress (German Chess Federation Congress) in Mannheim, Germany, with nine wins, one draw and one loss, when World War I broke out. Alekhine's prize was 1,100 marks (worth about 11,000 euros in terms of purchasing power today).  After the declaration of war against Russia, eleven "Russian" players (Alekhine, Bogoljubov, Bogatyrchuk, Flamberg, Koppelman, Maliutin, Rabinovich, Romanovsky, Saburov, Selezniev, Weinstein) were interned in Rastatt, Germany. On September 14, 17, and 29, 1914, four of them (Alekhine, Bogatyrchuk, Saburov, and Koppelman) were freed and allowed to return home.  Alekhine made his way back to Russia (via Switzerland, Italy, London, Stockholm and Finland) by the end of October 1914. A fifth player, Peter Romanovsky, was released in 1915,  and a sixth, Flamberg, was allowed to return to Warsaw in 1916. When Alekhine returned to Russia, he helped raise money to aid the Russian chess players who remained interned in Germany by giving simultaneous exhibitions. In December 1915, he won the Moscow Chess Club Championship. In April 1916 Alekhine won a mini-match against Alexander Evensohn with two wins and one loss at Kiev, and in summer he served in the Union of Cities (Red Cross) on the Austrian front. In September, he played five people in a blindfold display at a Russian military hospital at Tarnopol. In 1918, Alekhine won a "Triangular tournament" in Moscow. In June of the following year, Alekhine was briefly imprisoned in Odessa's death cell by the Odessa Cheka, suspected of being a spy. He was charged with links with White counter-intelligence, after the Russians forced the German army to retreat from Ukraine. Rumors appeared in the West that Alekhine had been killed by the Bolsheviks.  1920–27When conditions in Russia became more settled, Alekhine proved he was among Russia's strongest players. For example, in January 1920, he swept the Moscow City Chess Championship (11/11), but was not declared Moscow Champion because he was not a resident of the city. Also in October 1920, he won the All-Russian Championship in Moscow (+9 −0 =6); this tournament was retroactively defined as the first USSR Championship. His brother Alexei took third place in the tournament for amateurs.  In March 1920, Alekhine married Alexandra Batayeva. They divorced the next year.  For a short time in 1920–1921, he worked as an interpreter for the Communist International (Comintern) and was appointed secretary to the Education Department. In this capacity, he met a Swiss journalist and Comintern delegate, Anneliese Rüegg (Annalisa Ruegg), who was thirteen years older than he was, and they married on March 15, 1921. Shortly after, Alekhine was given permission to leave Russia for a visit to the West with his wife, from which he never returned. In June 1921, Alekhine abandoned his second wife in Paris and went to Berlin. In 1921–23 Alekhine played seven mini-matches. In 1921, he won against Nikolay Grigoriev (+2 −0 =5) in Moscow, drew with Richard Teichmann (+2 −2 =2) and won against Friedrich Sämisch (+2 −0 =0), both in Berlin. In 1922, he won against Ossip Bernstein (+1 −0 =1) and Arnold Aurbach (+1 −0 =1), both in Paris, and Manuel Golmayo (+1 −0 =1) in Madrid.  In 1923, he won against André Muffang (+2 −0 =0) in Paris. From 1921 to 1927, Alekhine won or shared first prize in about two-thirds of the many tournaments in which he played. His least successful efforts were: a tie for third place at Vienna 1922 behind Akiba Rubinstein and Richard Réti; and third place at the New York 1924 chess tournament behind ex-champion Emanuel Lasker and world champion José Raúl Capablanca (but ahead of Frank James Marshall, Richard Réti, Géza Maróczy, Efim Bogoljubov, Savielly Tartakower, Frederick Yates, Edward Lasker and David Janowski).   Technically, Alekhine's play was mostly better than his competitors', even Capablanca's, but he lacked confidence when playing his major rivals. Alekhine's major goal throughout this period was to arrange a match with Capablanca.  He thought the greatest obstacle was not Capablanca's play, but the requirement under the 1922 "London rules" (at Capablanca's insistence) that the challenger raise a purse of US $10,000, of which the defending champion would receive over half even if defeated (US $10,000 in 1927 would be worth about $391,000 in 2006 Using earnings for the conversion. If consumer prices are used, the result is about $257,000.   ).  Alekhine in November 1921 and Rubinstein and Aaron Nimzowitsch in 1923 challenged Capablanca, but were unable to raise the $10,000.       Raising the money was Alekhine's preliminary objective; he even went on tour, playing simultaneous exhibitions for modest fees day after day.    In New York on April 27, 1924, Alekhine broke the world record for blindfold play when he played twenty-six opponents (the previous record was twenty-five, set by Gyula Breyer), winning sixteen games, losing five, and drawing five after twelve hours of play. He broke his own world record on February 1, 1925 by playing twenty-eight games blindfold simultaneously in Paris, winning twenty-two, drawing three, and losing three.  In 1925, he became a French citizen and entered the Sorbonne Faculty of Law. Although sources differ about whether he completed his studies there, he was known as "Dr. Alekhine" in the 1930s.    His thesis was on the Chinese prison system. "He received a degree in law in Saint Petersburg in 1914 but never practiced." In October 1926, he won in Buenos Aires. From December 1926 to January 1927, Alekhine beat Max Euwe 5½–4½ in a match. In 1927, he married his third wife, Nadiezda Vasiliev (née Fabritzky) (Nadejda Fabritzky, Nadezhda Vasilieff), another older woman, the widow of the Russian general V. Vasiliev (Vassilieff).  World Chess Champion, first reign (1927–35) 1927 title match  In 1927, Alekhine's challenge to Capablanca was backed by a group of Argentinian businessmen and the president of Argentina, who guaranteed the funds,    and organized by the Club Argentino de Ajedrez (Argentine Chess Club) in Buenos Aires.   Original sources include:   ;  ;  ;  Immediately after his victory, Alekhine announced his terms for a rematch, reported in:    In the World Chess Championship match played from September to November 1927 at Buenos Aires, Alekhine won the title, scoring +6 −3 =25.  This was the longest formal World Championship match until the contest in 1984 between Anatoly Karpov and Garry Kasparov.  Alekhine's victory surprised almost the entire chess world, since he had never previously won a single game from Capablanca.    After Capablanca's death Alekhine expressed surprise at his own victory, since in 1927 he did not think he was superior to Capablanca, and he suggested that Capablanca had been overconfident. Alekhine, A., tribute to Capablanca, pp. 157–158, in: Alekhine, A., 107 Great Chess Battles, tr. E.G. Winter, Oxford University Press, 1980.  Capablanca entered the match with no technical or physical preparation,       while Alekhine got himself into good physical condition,  and had thoroughly studied Capablanca's play.  According to Kasparov, Alekhine's research uncovered many small inaccuracies, which occurred because Capablanca was unwilling to concentrate intensely.  Vladimir Kramnik commented that this was the first contest in which Capablanca had no easy wins.    Rematch offered, never finalized Immediately after winning the match, Alekhine announced that he was willing to give Capablanca a return match, on the same terms that Capablanca had required as champion—the challenger must provide a stake of US $10,000, of which more than half would go to the defending champion even if he was defeated.  After Capablanca's death, Alekhine wrote that Capablanca's demand for a $10,000 stake was an attempt to avoid challenges.  Negotiations dragged on for several years, often breaking down when agreement seemed in sight. Their relationship became bitter, and Alekhine demanded much higher appearance fees for tournaments in which Capablanca also played. Grandmaster Robert Byrne wrote that Alekhine consciously sought lesser opponents for his subsequent championship matches, rather than giving Capablanca another chance.  Defeats Bogolyubov twice in title matches Although he never agreed terms for a rematch against Capablanca, Alekhine played two world title matches with Bogoljubow, an official "Challenger of FIDE", in 1929 and 1934, winning handily both times.     The first was held at Wiesbaden, Heidelberg, Berlin, The Hague, and Amsterdam from September through November 1929. Alekhine retained his title, scoring +11 −5 =9.  From April to June 1934, Alekhine faced Bogoljubow again in a title match held in twelve German cities, defeating him by five games (+8 −3 =15).  In 1929, Bogoljubow was forty years old and perhaps already past his peak. Soloviov 2004, p.280       Anti-Bolshevik statements, controversyAfter the world championship match, Alekhine returned to Paris and spoke against Bolshevism. Afterwards, Nikolai Krylenko, president of the Soviet Chess Federation, published an official memorandum stating that Alekhine should be regarded as an enemy of the Soviets. The Soviet Chess Federation broke all contact with Alexander Alekhine until the end of the 1930s. His older brother Alexei, with whom Alexander Alekhine had had a very close relationship, publicly repudiated him and his anti-Soviet utterances shortly after, but Alexei may have had little choice about this decision.   The main source is Kotov 1975, p.140  In August 1939, Alexei Alekhine was murdered in Russia.    Dominates rivalsAlexander Alekhine dominated chess into the mid-1930s.  His most famous tournament victories were at the San Remo 1930 chess tournament (+13 =2, 3½ points ahead of Nimzowitsch) and the Bled 1931 chess tournament (+15 =11, 5½ points ahead of Bogoljubov). He won most of his other tournaments outright, shared first place in two, and the first tournament in which he placed lower was Hastings 1933–34 (shared second place, ½ point behind Salo Flohr). In 1933, Alekhine also swept an exhibition match against Rafael Cintron in San Juan (+4 −0 =0), but only managed to draw another match with Ossip Bernstein in Paris (+1 −1 =2).   From 1930 to 1935, Alekhine played on board one for France at four Chess Olympiads, winning: the first brilliancy prize at Hamburg in 1930;  gold medals for board one at Prague in 1931 and Folkestone in 1933;   and the silver medal for board one at Warsaw in 1935.  His loss to Latvian master Hermanis Matisons at Prague in 1931 was his first loss in a serious chess event since winning the world championship. In the early 1930s, Alekhine travelled the world giving simultaneous exhibitions, including Hawaii, Tokyo, Manila, Singapore,  Shanghai, Hong Kong, and the Dutch East Indies. In July 1933, Alekhine played thirty-two people blindfold simultaneously (a new world record) in Chicago, winning nineteen, drawing nine and losing four games. In 1934 Alekhine married his fourth wife, Grace Freeman (née Wishard), sixteen years his senior. She was the American-born widow of a British tea-planter in Ceylon, who retained her British citizenship to the end of her life and remained Alekhine's wife until his death.    About 1933 Reuben Fine noticed that Alekhine was drinking increasing amounts of alcohol.  Hans Kmoch wrote that Alekhine first drank heavily during the tournament at Bled in 1931, and drank heavily through the 1934 match with Bogoljubov.  Loss of the World title (1935–37) In 1933, Alekhine challenged Max Euwe to a championship match. Euwe, in the early 1930s, was regarded as one of three credible challengers (the others were Capablanca and Salo Flohr).  On October 3, 1935 the world championship match began in Zandvoort, the Netherlands. Although Alekhine took an early lead, from game thirteen onwards Euwe won twice as many games as Alekhine. The challenger became the new champion on December 15, 1935 with nine wins, thirteen draws, and eight losses.    This was the first world championship match that officially had seconds: Alekhine had the services of Salo Landau, and Euwe had Géza Maróczy.    Euwe's win was a major upset.  Kmoch  wrote that Alekhine drank no alcohol for the first half the match, but later took a glass before most games.  However, Salo Flohr, who also assisted Euwe, thought overconfidence caused more problems than alcohol for Alekhine in this match, and Alekhine himself had previously said he would win easily.  Münninghoff 2001  Later World Champions Vasily Smyslov, Boris Spassky, Anatoly Karpov and Garry Kasparov analyzed the match for their own benefit and concluded that Euwe deserved to win and that the standard of play was worthy of a world championship.   According to Kmoch, Alekhine abstained from alcohol altogether for five years after the 1935 match.  In the eighteen months after losing the title, Alekhine played in ten tournaments, with uneven results: tied for first with Paul Keres at Bad Nauheim in May 1936; first place at Dresden in June 1936; second to Flohr at Poděbrady in July 1936; sixth, behind Capablanca, Mikhail Botvinnik, Reuben Fine, Samuel Reshevsky, and Euwe at Nottingham in August 1936; third, behind Euwe and Fine, at Amsterdam in October 1936; tied for first with Salo Landau at Amsterdam (Quadrangular), also in October 1936; in 1936/37 he won at the Hastings New Year tournament, ahead of Fine and Erich Eliskases; first place at Nice (Quadrangular) in March 1937; third, behind Keres and Fine, at Margate in April 1937; tied for fourth with Keres, behind Flohr, Reshevsky and Vladimirs Petrovs, at Kemeri in June–July 1937; tied for second with Bogoljubow, behind Euwe, at Bad Nauheim (Quadrangular) in July 1937.    World Chess Champion, second reign (1937–46) 1937–39 Max Euwe was quick to arrange a return match with Alekhine, something José Raúl Capablanca had been unable to obtain after Alekhine won the world title in 1927. Alekhine regained the title from Euwe in December 1937 by a large margin (+10 −4 =11). In this match, held in the Netherlands, Euwe was seconded by Fine, and Alekhine by Erich Eliskases. The match was a real contest initially, but Euwe collapsed near the end, losing four of the last five games.     Fine attributed the collapse to nervous tension, possibly aggravated by Euwe's attempts to maintain a calm appearance. Alekhine played no more title matches, and thus held the title until his death. 1938 began well for Alekhine, who won the Montevideo 1938 chess tournament at Carrasco (in March) and at Margate (in April), and tied for first with Sir George Alan Thomas at Plymouth (in September). In November, however, he only tied for 4th–6th with Euwe and Samuel Reshevsky, behind Paul Keres, Reuben Fine, and Mikhail Botvinnik, ahead of Capablanca and Flohr, at the AVRO tournament in the Netherlands. This tournament was played in each of several Dutch cities for a few days at a time; it was therefore perhaps not surprising that rising stars took the first three places, as the older players found the travel very tiring. Immediately after the AVRO tournament, Botvinnik, who had finished in third place, challenged Alekhine to a match for the world championship. They agreed on a prize fund of US $10,000 with two-thirds going to the winner, and that if the match were to take place in Moscow, Alekhine would be invited at least three months in advance so that he could play in a tournament to get ready for the match. Other details had not been agreed when World War II interrupted negotiations, which the two players resumed after the war.   Based on Botvinnik's memoirs. Keres, who had won the AVRO tournament on tiebreak over Fine, also challenged Alekhine to a world championship match. Negotiations were proceeding in 1939 when they were disrupted by World War II. During the war Keres' home country, Estonia, was invaded first by the USSR, then by Germany, then again by the USSR. At the end of the war, the Soviet government prevented Keres from continuing the negotiations, on the grounds that he had collaborated with the Germans during their occupation of Estonia.   Alekhine was representing France at first board in the 8th Chess Olympiad at Buenos Aires 1939 when World War II broke out in Europe. The assembly of all team captains, with leading roles played by Alekhine (France), Savielly Tartakower (Poland), and Albert Becker (Germany), plus the president of the Argentine Chess Federation, Augusto de Muro, decided to go on with the Olympiad. Alekhine won the individual silver medal (nine wins, no losses, seven draws), behind Capablanca (only results from finals A and B - separately for both sections - counted for best individual scores).  Shortly after the Olympiad, Alekhine swept tournaments in Montevideo (7/7) and Caracas (10/10).At the end of August 1939, both Alekhine and Capablanca wrote to Augusto de Muro regarding a possible world championship rematch. Whereas the former spoke of a rematch as a virtual certainty, even stating that the Cuban was remaining in Buenos Aires until it came about, the latter referred at length to the financial burden in the aftermath of the Olympiad.  Supported by Latin-American financial pledges, José R. Capablanca challenged Alexander Alekhine to a world title match in November. Tentative plans not, however, actually backed by a deposit of the required purse ($10,000 in gold), led to a virtual agreement to play at Buenos Aires, Argentina beginning April 14, 1940. World War II (1939–45)Unlike many participants in the 1939 Chess Olympiad,  Alekhine returned to Europe in January 1940. After a short stay in Portugal,  he enlisted in the French army as a sanitation officer. After the fall of France (June 1940), he fled to Marseille. Alekhine tried to go to America by traveling to Lisbon and applying for an American visa. In October 1940, he sought permission to enter Cuba, promising to play a match with Capablanca. This request was denied.  To protect his wife, Grace Alekhine, an American Jew, and her French assets (a castle at Saint Aubin-le-Cauf, near Dieppe, which the Nazis looted), he agreed to cooperate with the Nazis.  Alekhine took part in chess tournaments in Munich, Salzburg, Kraków/Warsaw, and Prague, organised by Ehrhardt Post, the Chief Executive of the Nazi-controlled Grossdeutscher Schachbund ("Greater Germany Chess Federation")  - Keres, Bogoljubov, Gösta Stoltz, and several other strong masters in Nazi-occupied Europe also played in such events.    In 1941, he tied for second-third with Erik Lundin in the Munich 1941 chess tournament (Europaturnier in September, won by Stoltz), shared first with Paul Felix Schmidt at Kraków/Warsaw (the 2nd General Government-ch, in October)  and won in Madrid (in December). The following year he won in the Salzburg 1942 chess tournament (June 1942) and in Munich (September 1942; the Nazis named this the Europameisterschaft, which means "European Championship").   Later in 1942 he won at Warsaw/Lublin/Kraków (the 3rd GG-ch; October 1942) and tied for first with Klaus Junge in Prague (Duras Jubileé; December 1942). In 1943, he drew a mini-match (+1 −1) with Bogoljubov in Warsaw (March 1943), he won in Prague (April 1943) and tied for first with Keres in Salzburg (June 1943).By late 1943, Alekhine was spending all his time in Spain and Portugal, as the German representative to chess events. This also allowed him to get away from the onrushing Soviet invasion into eastern Europe.   In 1944, he narrowly won a match against Ramón Rey Ardid in Zaragoza (+1 −0 =3; April 1944) and won in Gijon (July 1944). The following year, he won at Madrid (March 1945), tied for second place with Antonio Medina at Gijón (July 1945; the event was won by Antonio Rico), won at  Sabadell (August 1945), he tied for first with F. López Núñez in Almeria (August 1945), won in Melilla (September 1945) and took second in Caceres, behind Francisco Lupi (Autumn 1945). Alekhine's last match was with Lupi at Estoril near Lisbon, Portugal, in January 1946. Alekhine won two games, lost one, and drew one. Alekhine took an interest in the development of the chess prodigy Arturo Pomar and devoted a section of his last book (¡Legado! 1946) to him. They played at Gijon 1944, when Pomar, aged twelve, achieved a creditable draw with the champion.  His final year After World War II, Alekhine was not invited to chess tournaments outside the Iberian Peninsula, because of his alleged Nazi affiliation. His original invitation to the London 1946 tournament was withdrawn when the other competitors protested. While planning for a World Championship match against Botvinnik,  Alekhine died in his hotel room in Estoril, Portugal on March 24, 1946. The circumstances of his death are still a matter of debate. It is usually attributed to a heart attack, but a letter in Chess Life magazine from a witness to the autopsy stated that choking on meat was the actual cause of death. When his body was examined during an autopsy, a three-inch long piece of unchewed meat was discovered blocking his windpipe.     Some have speculated that he was murdered by a French "death squad". A few years later, Alekhine's son, Alexander Alekhine Junior, said that "the hand of Moscow reached his father".  Canadian Grandmaster Kevin Spraggett, who has lived in Portugal since the late 1980s, and who has thoroughly investigated Alekhine's death, favors this possibility. Spraggett makes a case for the manipulation of the crime scene and the autopsy by the Portuguese secret police PIDE. He believes that Alekhine was murdered outside his hotel room, probably by the Soviets.      Alekhine's burial was sponsored by FIDE, and the remains were transferred to the Cimetière du Montparnasse, Paris, France in 1956.   Assessment Playing strength and style  Statistical ranking systems differ sharply in their views of Alekhine. "Warriors of the Mind" rates him only the 18th strongest player of all time and comments that victories over players such as Bogoljubov and Euwe are not a strong basis for an "all time" ranking. Keene 1989  But the website "Chessmetrics" ranks him between the fourth and eighth best of all time, depending on the lengths of the peak periods being compared, and concludes that at his absolute peak he was a little stronger than Emanuel Lasker and Capablanca, although a little weaker than Botvinnik.    Jeff Sonas, the author of the website "Chessmetrics", rates Alekhine as the sixth highest peak strength, relative to other players of the same era, of all-time on the basis of comparable ratings.    He also assesses Alekhine's victory at the tournament of San Remo in 1930 as the sixth best performance ever in tournaments.  In his 1978 book The Rating of Chessplayers, Past and Present, Arpad Elo gave retrospective ratings to players based on their performance over the best five-year span of their career. He concluded that Alekhine was the joint fifth strongest player of those surveyed (tied with Paul Morphy and Vasily Smyslov), behind Capablanca, Botvinnik, Emanuel Lasker and Mikhail Tal. Alekhine's peak period was in the early 1930s, when he won almost every tournament he played, sometimes by huge margins. Afterward, his play declined, and he never won a top-class tournament after 1934. After Alekhine regained his world title in 1937, there were several new contenders, all of whom would have been serious challengers.   Alekhine was one of the greatest attacking players and could apparently produce combinations at will. What set him apart from most other attacking players was his ability to see the potential for an attack and prepare for it in positions where others saw nothing. Rudolf Spielmann, a master tactician who produced many brilliancies, said, "I can see the combinations as well as Alekhine, but I cannot get to the same positions."  Dr. Max Euwe said, "Alekhine is a poet who creates a work of art out of something that would hardly inspire another man to send home a picture post-card."    An explanation offered by Réti was, "he beats his opponents by analysing simple and apparently harmless sequences of moves in order to see whether at some time or another at the end of it an original possibility, and therefore one difficult to see, might be hidden."  John Nunn commented that "Alekhine had a special ability to provoke complications without taking excessive risks",    and Edward Winter called him "the supreme genius of the complicated position."  Some of Alekhine's combinations are so complex that even modern champions and contenders disagree in their analyses of them. Nevertheless, Garry Kasparov said that Alekhine's attacking play was based on solid positional foundations,    and Harry Golombek went further, saying that "Alekhine was the most versatile of all chess geniuses, being equally at home in every style of play and in all phases of the game."  Reuben Fine, a serious contender for the world championship in the late 1930s, wrote in the 1950s that Alekhine's collection of best games was one of the three most beautiful that he knew,  and Golombek was equally impressed. Golombek 1955 Alekhine's games have a higher percentage of wins than those of any other World Champion, and his drawn games are on average among the longest of all champions'.    His desire to win extended beyond formal chess competition. When Fine beat him in some casual games in 1933, Alekhine demanded a match for a small stake. And in table tennis, which Alekhine played enthusiastically but badly, he would often crush the ball when he lost. Bobby Fischer, in a 1964 article, ranked Alekhine as one of the ten greatest players in history.    Fischer, who was famous for the clarity of his play,  wrote of Alekhine, "Alekhine has never been a hero of mine, and I've never cared for his style of play. There's nothing light or breezy about it; it worked for him, but it could scarcely work for anyone else. He played gigantic conceptions, full of outrageous and unprecedented ideas. ... [H]e had great imagination; he could see more deeply into a situation than any other player in chess history. ... It was in the most complicated positions that Alekhine found his grandest concepts." Alekhine's style had a profound influence on Kasparov, who said: "Alexander Alekhine is the first luminary among the others who are still having the greatest influence on me. I like his universality, his approach to the game, his chess ideas. I am sure that the future belongs to Alekhine chess."  In 2012, Levon Aronian said that he considers Alekhine the greatest chess player of all time.  Influence on the game   Several openings and opening variations are named after Alekhine. In addition to the well-known Alekhine's Defence (1.e4 Nf6) and the Albin-Chatard-Alekhine Attack in the "orthodox" Paulsen variation of the French Defense, Fine 1943  there are Alekhine Variations in: the Budapest Gambit,   the Vienna Game, the Exchange Variation of the Ruy Lopez, the Winawer Variation of the French Defense; the Dragon Variation of the Sicilian Defense, the Queen's Gambit Accepted, the Slav Defense, the Queen's Pawn Game, the Catalan Opening and the Dutch Defense (where three different lines bear his name).    Irving Chernev commented, "The openings consist of Alekhine's games, with a few variations." Alekhine also composed a few endgame studies, one of which is shown on the right, a miniature (a study with a maximum of seven pieces). Harold van der Heijden endgame study database (2005). Alekhine wrote over twenty books on chess, mostly annotated editions of the games in a major match or tournament, plus collections of his best games between 1908 and 1937.  Unlike Wilhelm Steinitz, Emanuel Lasker, Capablanca and Euwe, he wrote no books that explained his ideas about the game or showed beginners how to improve their play.    His books appeal to expert players rather than beginners:  they contain many long analyses of variations in critical positions, and "singularities and exceptions were his forte, not rules and simplifications". Although Alekhine was declared an enemy of the Soviet Union after his anti-Bolshevik statement in 1928,  he was gradually rehabilitated by the Soviet chess elite following his death in 1946. Alexander Kotov's research on Alekhine's games and career, culminating in a biography, Kotov 1975  led to a Soviet series of Alekhine Memorial tournaments. The first of these, at Moscow 1956, was won jointly by  Botvinnik and Vasily Smyslov.  In their book The Soviet School of Chess Kotov and Yudovich devoted a chapter to Alekhine, called him "Russia's greatest player" and praised his capacity for seizing the initiative by concrete tactical play in the opening. Kotov 1958  Botvinnik wrote that the Soviet School of chess learned from Alekhine's fighting qualities, capacity for self-criticism and combinative vision. Botvinnik 1951  Alekhine had written that success in chess required "Firstly, self-knowledge; secondly, a firm comprehension of my opponent's strength and weakness; thirdly, a higher aim – ... artistic and scientific accomplishments which accord our chess equal rank with other arts."    Accusations of "improving" games  Samuel Reshevsky wrote that Alekhine "allegedly made up games against fictitious opponents in which he came out the victor and had these games published in various chess magazines."  In a recent book Andy Soltis lists "Alekhine's 15 Improvements".  The most famous example is his game with five queens in Moscow in 1915. In the actual game, Alekhine, playing as Black, beat Grigoriev in the Moscow 1915 tournament; but in one of his books he presented the "Five Queens" variation (starting with a move he rejected as Black in the original game) as an actual game won by the White player in Moscow in 1915 (he did not say in the book who was who in this version, nor that it was in the tournament). The original game, without the five queens, was Grigoriev vs Alekhine, Moscow 1915, which Alekhine annotated for   But he presented the "Five Queens" version in a note to Tarrasch vs Alekhine, St. Petersburg 1914, which is game 26 in Alekhine 1985. In the same book, Alekhine presented as a note to game 90 (Alekhine vs Teichmann, Berlin 1921) a 15-move win against O. Tenner, which Tenner claimed was actually a variation that arose in their post-game analysis of their 23-move draw. In the position of the diagram at right, which never arose in real play, Alekhine claimed that White wins by 24.Rh6, as after some complicated play Black is mated or goes into an endgame a queen down. Some recent analyses suggest that this is not the case: if White plays 24.Rh6, black can play 24...Bg4+! and White has no mating attack.  A later computer-assisted analysis concludes that White can force a win, but only by diverging from Alekhine's move sequence at move 20, while there are only three queens. Chess historian Edward Winter investigated a game Alekhine allegedly won in fifteen moves via a queen sacrifice at Sabadell in 1945.  Some photos of the game in progress were discovered that showed the players during the game and their chessboard. Based on the position that the chess pieces had taken on the chessboard in this photo, the game could never have taken the course that was stated in the published version. This raised suspicions that the published version was made up. Even if the published version is a fake, however, there is no doubt that Alekhine did defeat his opponent in the actual game, and there is no evidence that Alekhine was the source of the famous fifteen-move win whose authenticity is doubted.  Accusations of antisemitismDuring World War II, Alekhine played in several tournaments held in Germany or German-occupied territory, as did many strong players in occupied and neutral countries.   In March 1941, a series of articles appeared under Alekhine's name in the Pariser Zeitung, a German-language newspaper published in Paris by the occupying German forces. Among other things, these articles said that Jews had a great talent for exploiting chess but showed no signs of chess artistry; described the hypermodern theories of Nimzowitsch and Réti as "this cheap bluff, this shameless self-publicity", hyped by "the majority of Anglo-Jewish pseudo-intellectuals"; and described his 1937 match with Euwe as "a triumph against the Jewish conspiracy".  Alekhine was reported as making further antisemitic statements in interviews for two Spanish newspapers in September 1941; in one of these it was said that "Aryan chess was aggressive chess ... on the other hand, the Semitic concept admitted the idea of pure defence." Almost immediately after the liberation of Paris, Alekhine publicly stated that "he had to write two chess articles for the Pariser Zeitung before the Germans granted him his exit visa ... Articles which Alekhine claims were purely scientific were rewritten by the Germans, published and made to treat chess from a racial viewpoint." He wrote at least two further disavowals, in an open letter to the organizer of the 1946 London tournament (W. Hatton-Ward) and in his posthumous book ¡Legado!. These three denials are phrased differently. Extensive investigations by Ken Whyld have not yielded conclusive evidence of the authenticity of the articles. Chess writer Jacques Le Monnier claimed in a 1986 issue of Europe Échecs that in 1958 he saw some of Alekhine's notebooks and found, in Alekhine's own handwriting, the exact text of the first antisemitic article, which appeared in Pariser Zeitung on March 18, 1941. In his 1973 book 75 parties d'Alekhine ("75 of Alekhine's games"), however, Le Monnier had written "It will never be known whether Alekhine was behind these articles or whether they were manipulated by the editor of the Pariser Zeitung." British chess historian Edward G. Winter notes that the articles in the Pariser Zeitung misspelled the names of several famous chess masters, which could be interpreted as evidence of forgery or as attempts by Alekhine to signal that he was being forced to write things that he did not believe; but these could simply have been typesetting errors, as Alekhine's handwriting was not easy to read. The articles contained (probably) incorrect claims that Lionel Kieseritzky (Kieseritsky in English, Kizierycki in Polish) was a Polish Jew, although (probably) Kieseritzky was neither Polish nor Jewish.  Winter concludes: "Although, as things stand, it is difficult to construct much of a defence for Alekhine, only the discovery of the articles in his own handwriting will settle the matter beyond all doubt." Under current French copyright law, Alekhine's notebooks will not enter the public domain until January 1, 2017.   Winter cites many original documents including:  Alekhine Nazi Articles, a privately printed booklet edited by Ken Whyld, that contains an English translation of the Pariser Zeitung articles; Alekhine's disavowal of these articles in News Review, November 23, 1944, also reported in British Chess Magazine December 1944 and Chess January 1945; Alekhine's posthumous book ¡Legado!; interviews in the September 3, 1941 editions of El Alcázar and Informaciones, which report Alekhine as making anti-Semitic statements about chess.   There is evidence that Alekhine was not antisemitic in his personal or chess relationships with Jews. In June 1919, he was arrested by the Cheka, imprisoned in Odessa and sentenced to death. Yakov Vilner, a Jewish master, saved him by sending a telegram to the chairman of the Ukrainian Council of People's Commissars, who knew of Alekhine and ordered his release.  Alekhine accepted and apparently used chess analysis from Charles Jaffe in his World Championship match against Capablanca. Jaffe was a Jewish master who lived in New York, where Alekhine often visited, and upon his return to New York after defeating Capablanca, Alekhine played a short match as a favour to Jaffe, without financial remuneration. Saidy 1974, p.190-191  Alekhine's second for the 1935 match with Max Euwe was the master Salo Landau, a Dutch Jew. The American Jewish grandmaster Arnold Denker wrote that he found Alekhine very friendly in chess settings, taking part in consultation games and productive analysis sessions. Denker also wrote that Alekhine treated the younger and (at that time) virtually unproven Denker to dinner on many occasions in New York during the 1930s, when the economy was very weak because of the Great Depression. Denker added that Alekhine, during the early 1930s, opined that the American Jewish grandmaster Isaac Kashdan might be his next challenger (this did not in fact occur).  He gave chess lessons to 14-year-old prodigy Gerardo Budowski, a German Jew, in Paris in Spring 1940.  Alekhine also married an American Jew, Grace Wishard, as his fourth wife. Mrs. Grace Alekhine was the women's champion of Paris in 1944.  Notable chess games      Alekhine vs Yates, London 1922, Queen's Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense. Main Line (D64)  1–0 Alekhine conjures up an attack in the endgame, and his King joins the fray. Efim Bogolyubov vs Alexander Alekhine, Hastings 1922, Dutch Defence, Classical Variation (A91), 0–1 This has been called one of the greatest games ever played, with some incredibly deep variations as Black prepares to queen a pawn. Ernst Gruenfeld vs Alexander Alekhine, Karlsbad 1923, Queen's Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense. Rubinstein Attack (D64), 0–1 Gruenfeld makes no obvious mistakes but his slow build-up lets Alekhine take the initiative and start squeezing him off the board. Gruenfeld desperately tries to free his position and is crushed by a series of sacrifices that forces the win of a piece or checkmate. Richard Reti vs Alexander Alekhine, Baden Baden 1925, Hungarian Opening: Reversed Alekhine (A00), 0–1 A tactically complex game in which Alekhine unleashes a 12-move combination that wins a Knight. Jose Raul Capablanca vs Alexander Alekhine, World Championship match, Buenos Aires 1927, Queen's Gambit Declined (D52), 0–1 The game ends in an interesting position with four queens on the board. Alexander Alekhine vs Aron Nimzowitsch, San Remo 1930, French Defence, Winawer Variation (C17), 1–0 One of the shortest games ending in a zugzwang – by the 26th move, Black is already strategically lost and has no good moves. This game also spawned the term 'Alekhine's gun' for the formation where the queen lines up behind the two rooks. Gideon Stahlberg vs Alexander Alekhine, Hamburg 1930, 3rd Olympiad, Nimzo-Indian Defence, Spielmann Variation (E23), 0–1 1st best game prize. Alexander Alekhine vs Emanuel Lasker, Zurich 1934, Queen's Gambit Declined, Orthodox Defense, Bd3 line (D67), 1–0 A short game ending with a queen sacrifice. After the tournament Lasker said: "Alekhine's attacking genius has no equal in the history of the game". Max Euwe vs Alexander Alekhine, World Championship Match, game 4, The Hague 1935, Grunfeld Defence, Russian Variation (D81), 0–1 Alekhine sacrifices two rooks, but traps Euwe's King in the centre, wins the queen, then finishes elegantly.   WritingsAlekine wrote over twenty books on chess.    Some of the best-known are:    Originally published in two volumes as My Best Games of Chess 1908–1923 and My Best Games of Chess 1924–1937.         Games analysis published after 1938 were edited by Edward Winter and published in 1980 in the book:      Summary of results in competitions Tournament resultsHere are Alekhine's placings and scores in tournaments:   Alekhine 1985            Under Score, + games won, = games drawn, − games lost   Date  Location  Place  Score  Notes  1907  Moscow  11–13  5½/15  +5=1−9 his brother Alexei Alekhine tied for 4-6th  1908  Moscow  1st  ?   ? Moscow Chess Club Spring Tournament.   1908  Düsseldorf  3–4  9/13  +8=2−3 16th DSB Congress, A Tournament  1908/09  Moscow  1st  6½/9  +5=3−1 Moscow Chess Club Autumn Tournament  1909  Saint Petersburg  1st  13/16  +12=2−2 All-Russian Amateur Tournament  1910  Hamburg  7–8  8½/16  +5=7−4 17th DSB Congress, Schlechter won  1911  Cologne  1st  3/3  +3=0−0 Quadrangular  1911  Carlsbad  8–9  13½/25  +11=5−9 Teichmann won  1912  Saint Petersburg  1–2  8/9  +8=0-1 First Winter Tournament, lost a game to Vasily Osipovich Smyslov  1912  Saint Petersburg  1st  7/9  +6=2−1 ? Second Winter Tournament, lost a game to Boris Koyalovich  1912  Stockholm  1st  8½/10  +8=1−1 8th Nordic Championship, ahead of Spielmann  1912  Vilnius  6–7  8½/18  +7=3−8 7th Russian Championship (All-Russian Masters' Tournament), Rubinstein won  1913  Saint Petersburg  1–2  2/3  +2=0−1 Quadrangular, tied with Levenfish  1913  Scheveningen  1st  11½/13  +11=1−1 ahead of Janowski  1913/14  Saint Petersburg  1–2  13½/17  +13=1−3 8th Russian Championship (All-Russian Masters' Tournament), tied with Nimzowitsch  1914  Saint Petersburg  3rd  10/18  +6=8−4 Lasker 13½, Capablanca 13, Alekhine 10, Tarrasch 8½, Marshall 8  1914  Paris  1–2 2½/3  +2=1−0 Cafe Continental Quadrangular, tied with Marshall, third Muffang, fourth Hallegua  1914  Mannheim  leading  9½/11  +9=1−1 19th DSB Congress, interrupted by the start of World War I  1915  Moscow  1st  10½/11  +10=1−0 Moscow Chess Club Championship  1919/20  Moscow  1st  11/11  +11=0−0 Moscow City Championship, not declared Moscow Champion because he was not a resident of Moscow  1920  Moscow  1st  12/15  +9=6−0 later recognised as the 1st USSR Championship  1921  Triberg  1st  7/8  +6=2−0 ahead of Bogoljubov  1921  Budapest  1st  8½/11  +6=5−0 ahead of Grünfeld  1921  The Hague  1st  8/9  +7=2−0 ahead of Tartakower  1922  Pistyan  2–3  14½/18  +12=5−1 tied with Spielmann, behind Bogoljubov  1922  London  2nd  11½/15  +8=7−0 Capablanca 13, Alekhine 11½, Vidmar 11, Rubinstein 10½  1922  Hastings  1st  7½/10  +6=3−1 Rubinstein 7, Bogoljubov and Thomas 4½, Tarrasch 4, Yates 2½  1922  Vienna  3–6  9/14  +7=4−3 Rubinstein won  1923  Margate  2–5  4½/7  +3=3−1 Grünfeld won  1923  Carlsbad  1–3  11½/17  +9=5−3 tied with Bogoljubov and Maróczy  1923  Portsmouth  1st  11½/12  +11=1−0 ahead of Vajda  1924  New York  3rd  12/20  +6=12−2 Lasker 16, Capablanca 14½, Alekhine 12, Marshall 11, Réti 10½. Maróczy 10, Bogoljubov 9½  1925  Paris  1st  6½/8  +5=3−0 ahead of Tartakower  1925  Bern  1st  4/6  +3=2−1 Quadrangular  1925  Baden-Baden  1st  16/20  +12=8−0 ahead of Rubinstein  1925/26  Hastings  1–2  8½/9  +8=1−0 tied with Vidmar  1926  Semmering  2nd  12½/17  +11=3−3 Spielmann won  1926  Dresden  2nd  7/9  +5=4−0 Nimzowitsch won  1926  Scarborough  1st  5½/6  +5=1−0 Alekhine won a play-off match against Colle 2-0  1926  Birmingham  1st  5/5  +5=0−0 ahead of Znosko-Borovsky  1926  Buenos Aires  1st  10/10  +10=0−0 ahead of Villegas and Illa  1927  New York  2nd  11½/20  +5=13−2 Capablanca 14, Alekhine 11½, Nimzowitsch 10½, Vidmar 10, Spielmann 8, Marshall 6  1927  Kecskemét  1st  12/16  +8=8−0 ahead of Nimzowitsch and Steiner  1929  Bradley Beach  1st  8½/9  +8=1−0 ahead of Lajos Steiner  1930  San Remo  1st  14/15  +13=2−0 Nimzowitsch 10½; Rubinstein 10; Bogoljubov 9½; Yates 9  1931  Nice  1st  6/8  +4=4−0 consultation tournament  1931  Bled  1st  20½/26  +15=11−0 Bogoljubov 15; Nimzowitsch 14; Flohr, Kashdan, Stoltz and Vidmar 13½  1932  Bern  1–3  2/3  +2=0−1 Quadrangular, tied with Voellmy and Naegeli  1932  Bern  1st  12½/15  +11=3−1 Swiss Championship (title awarded to Hans Johner and Paul Johner)  1932  London  1st  9/11  +7=4−0 ahead of Flohr  1932  Pasadena  1st  8½/11  +7=3−1 ahead of Kashdan  1932  Mexico City  1–2  8½/9  +8=1−0 tied with Kashdan  1933  Paris  1st  8/9  +7=2−0 ahead of Tartakower  1933/34  Hastings  2nd  6½/9  +4=5−0 Flohr 7, Alekhine and Andor Lilienthal 6½, C.H.O'D. Alexander and Eliskases 5  1934  Rotterdam  1st  3/3  +3=0−0 Quadrangular  1934  Zürich  1st  13/15  +12=2−1 Swiss Championship (title awarded to Hans Johner)  1935  Örebro  1st  8½/9  +8=1−0 ahead of Lundin  1936  Bad Nauheim  1–2  6½/9  +4=5−0 tied with Keres  1936  Dresden  1st  6½/9  +5=3−1 ahead of Engels  1936  Poděbrady  2nd  12½/17  +8=9−0 Flohr won  1936  Nottingham  6th  9/14  +6=6−2 Botvinnik and Capablanca 10; Euwe, Fine and Reshevsky 9½  1936  Amsterdam  3rd  4½/7  +3=3−1 Euwe and Fine won  1936  Amsterdam  1–2  2½/3  +2=1−0 Quadrangular, tied with Landau  1936/37  Hastings  1st  8/9  +7=2−0 Fine 7½, Eliskases 5½, Vidmar and Feigins 4½  1937  Margate  3rd  6/9  +6=0−3 tied for 1–2 were Keres and Fine  1937  Kemeri  4–5  11½/17  +7=9−1 tied for 1–3 were Flohr, Petrovs and Reshevsky  1937  Bad Nauheim  2–3  3½/6  +3=1−2 Quadrangular, Euwe won, the other players were Bogoljubov and Sämisch  1937  Nice  1st  2½/3  +2=1−0 Quadrangular  1938  Montevideo  1st  13/15  +11=4−0 ahead of Guimard  1938  Margate  1st  7/9  +6=2−1 ahead of Spielmann  1938  Netherlands (ten cities)  4–6  7/14  +3=8−3 AVRO tournament, Keres and Fine 8½; Botvinnik 7½; Alekhine, Euwe and Reshevsky 7; Capablanca 6  1939  Montevideo  1st  7/7  +7=0−0 ahead of Golombek  1939  Caracas  1st  10/10  +10=0−0   1941  Munich  2–3  10½/15  +8=5−2 tied with Lundin, behind Stoltz  1941  Kraków, Warsaw  1–2  8½/11  +6=5−0 tied with Schmidt  1941  Madrid  1st  5/5  +5=0−0   1942  Salzburg  1st  7½/10  +7=1−2 ahead of Keres  1942  Munich  1st  8½/11  +7=3−1 1st European Championship, ahead of Keres  1942  Warsaw, Lublin, Kraków  1st  7½/11  +6=3−1 ahead of Junge  1942  Prague  1–2  8½/11  +6=5−0 tied with Junge  1943  Prague  1st  17/19  +15=4−0 ahead of Keres  1943  Salzburg  1–2  7½/10  +5=5−0 tied with Keres  1944  Gijón  1st  7½/8  +7=1−0   1945  Madrid  1st  8½/9  +8=1−0   1945  Gijón  2–3  6½/9  +6=1−2 tied with Medina, behind Rico  1945  Sabadell  1st  7½/9  +6=3−0   1945  Almeria  1–2  5½/8  +4=3−1 tied with Lopez Nunez  1945  Melilla  1st  6½/7  +6=1−0   1945  Caceres  2nd  3½/5  +3=1−1 Lupi won   Match resultsHere are Alekhine's results in matches:        Under Score, + games won, = games drawn, − games lost    Date  Opponent  Result  Location  Score  Notes  1908  Curt von Bardeleben  Won  Düsseldorf  4½/5  +4=1−0     1908  Hans Fahrni  Drew  Munich  1½/3  +1=1−1     1908  Benjamin Blumenfeld  Won  Moscow  4½/5  +4=1−0     1908  Vladimir Nenarokov  Lost  Moscow  0/3  +0=0−3     1913  Stepan Levitsky  Won  Saint Petersburg  7/10  +7=0−3     1913  Edward Lasker  Won  Paris, London  3/3  +3=0−0     1913  José Raúl Capablanca  Lost  Saint Petersburg  0/2  +0=0−2  exhibition match  1914  Aron Nimzowitsch  Drew  Saint Petersburg  1/2  +1=0−1  play-off match  1916  Alexander Evensohn  Won  Kiev  2/3  +2=0−1     1918  Abram Rabinovich  Won  Moscow  3½/4  +3=1−0     1918  Boris Verlinsky  Won  Odessa  6/6  +6=0−0     1920  Nikolay Pavlov-Pianov  Drew  Moscow  1/2  +1=0−1  training match  1921  Nikolay Grigoriev  Won  Moscow  4½/7  +2=5−0  training match  1921  Efim Bogoljubow  Drew  Triberg  2/4  +1=2−1  "secret" training match  1921  Richard Teichmann  Drew  Berlin  3/6  +2=2−2     1921  Friedrich Sämisch  Won  Berlin  2/2  +2=0−0     1922  Ossip Bernstein  Won  Paris  1½/2  +1=1−0     1922  Arnold Aurbach  Won  Paris  1½/2  +1=1−0     1922  Manuel Golmayo  Won  Madrid  1½/2  +1=1−0     1923  André Muffang  Won  Paris  2/2  +2=0−0     1926  Edgar Colle  Won  Scarborough  2/2  +2=0−0  play-off match  1926/7  Max Euwe  Won  Amsterdam  5½/10  +3=5−2     1927  José Raúl Capablanca  Won  Buenos Aires  18½/34  +6=25−3  Alekhine became world champion  1927  Charles Jaffe  Won  New York  2/2  +2=0−0  exhibition match  1929  Efim Bogoljubow  Won  Wiesbaden, Berlin, Amsterdam  15½/25  +11=9−5  retained world championship  1933  Rafael Cintron  Won  San Juan  4/4  +4=0−0  exhibition match  1933  Ossip Bernstein  Drew  Paris  2/4  +1=2−1    1934  Efim Bogoljubow  Won  Baden-Baden, Villingen, Pforzheim,  Bayreuth, Kissingen, Berlin  15½/25  +8=15−3  retained world championship  1935  Max Euwe  Lost  Amsterdam, The Hague, Utrecht  14½/30  +8=13−9  lost world championship  1937  Max Euwe  Won  Rotterdam, Haarlem, Leiden, Zwolle,  Amsterdam, Delft, The Hague  15½/25  +10=11−4  regained world championship  1937  Max Euwe  Lost  The Hague  2/5  +1=2−2  exhibition match  1941  Lopez Esnaola  Won  Vitoria  2/2  +2=0−0    1943  Efim Bogoljubow  Drew  Warsaw  1/2  +1=0−1    1944  Ramón Rey Ardid  Won  Zaragoza  2½/4  +1=3−0    1946  Francisco Lupi  Won  Estoril  2½/4  +2=1−1     Chess Olympiad resultsHere are Alekhine's results in Chess Olympiads. He played top board for France in all these events.  Under Score, + games won, = games drawn, − games lost    Date  Location  Number Score  Notes  1930  Hamburg  3  9/9  +9=0−0  Alekhine won the brilliancy prize for his game against Gideon Ståhlberg (Sweden). He did not win a medal because the medallists played 17 games each.     1931  Prague  4  13½/18  +10=7−1  Alekhine won the gold medal for 1st board. His loss to Hermanis Matisons (Latvia) was his first loss in a serious chess event since winning the world championship.     1933  Folkestone  5  9½/12  +8=3−1  Alekhine won the gold medal for 1st board. His loss to Savielly Tartakower (Poland) was his second and last loss in chess olympiads.     1935  Warsaw  6  12/17  +7=10−0  Alekhine won the silver medal for 1st board (Salo Flohr of Czechoslovakia took the gold by scoring 13/17).     1939  Buenos Aires  8  7½/10 (12½/16)  +9=7−0  Alekhine won the silver medal for 1st board (José Raúl Capablanca of Cuba took the gold by scoring 8½/11). Only games in the final stage were counted for awarding the medals. The first score is for the final stage, the one in parentheses is Alekhine's total score.      See also  List of people who have beaten Alexander Alekhine in chess World Chess Championship 1927   Other information In the town of Cascais, Portugal, there is a street named after Alekhine: Rua Alexander Alekhine. Cascais is near Estoril, where Alekhine died.His book 'My Best Games of Chess 1924–1937' featured in the classic 1946 film 'A Matter of Life and Death'. Notes  Further reading    This is a collection of games annotated by Alekhine, published long after his death.   This 1985 reprint is a merge from two separate volumes published originally in 1929 and 1937.                                     Reinfeld, Fred, 1942, "The Immortal Games of Capablanca", Dover Publishers.                   External links   Alekhine at www.chessgames.com Alekhine rare interview (sound clip) Hans Kmoch talks about Alekhine Alekhine's death. An unresolved mystery Edward Winter, List of Books About Capablanca and Alekhine
Alexander Dallas Bache   Alexander Dallas Bache (July 19, 1806 – February 17, 1867) was an American physicist, scientist and surveyor who erected coastal fortifications and conducted a detailed survey mapping of the United States coastline. BiographyAlexander Bache was born in Philadelphia, the son of Richard Bache, Jr., and Sophia Burrell Dallas, nephew of George M. Dallas, and great-grandson of Benjamin Franklin. After graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1825, he acted as assistant professor there for some time. As a lieutenant in the United States Army Corps of Engineers, he was engaged for a short time in the erection of coastal fortifications, including Fort Adams in Newport, Rhode Island. Bache resigned from the Army on June 1, 1829.Bache spent the years 1836 to 1838 in Europe on behalf of the trustees of what became Girard College in 1848. Abroad, he examined European systems of education and, on his return, published a valuable report. From 1839 to 1842, he served as the first president of Central High School of Philadelphia, one of the oldest public high schools in the United States. He occupied the post of professor of natural philosophy and chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania from 1828 to 1841 and again from 1842 to 1843.He married Nancy Clark Fowler on September 30, 1838 at Newport, Rhode Island. She was born in Newport, Rhode Island, and died on January 13, 1870 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. She was his associate in the preparation of much of his published material.They were the parents of one son, Henry Wood Bache, born in 1839 and died on November 7, 1878 at Bristol, Long Island, New York.In 1843, on the death of Ferdinand Rudolph Hassler, Bache was appointed superintendent of the United States Coast Survey. He convinced the United States Congress of the value of this work and by means of the liberal aid it granted, he completed the mapping out of the whole coast by a skillful division of labor and the erection of numerous observing stations. In addition, magnetic and meteorological data was collected.  Bache served has head of the Coast Survey for 24 years until his death in 1867.He was elected an Associate Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1845.    He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh on 15 March 1858,  and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society on 24 May 1860.After the Civil War, Bache was elected a 3rd Class Companion of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States (MOLLUS) in consideration of his contributions to the war effort.He died at Newport, Rhode Island and was buried in the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, DC, where a monument was built by American architect Henry Hobson Richardson.Two survey ships were named for him, the A. D. Bache of 1871 and its successor in 1901.The cydippid ctenophore Pleurobrachia bachei A. Agassiz, 1860 was named for him; it was discovered in 1859 by Alexander Agassiz who was working as an engineer on a ship surveying the United States/Canada boundary between Washington State and British Columbia.  See also   The Bache Years (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Central Library) Alexander Dallas Bache: Leader of American Science and Second Superintendent of the United States Coast Survey (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) Alexander Dallas Bache Monument – Bache's tomb in the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, DC. Alexander Dallas Bache School, Philadelphia Richard Bache – Bache's grandfather Richard Bache, Jr. – Bache's father   References   Jansen, Axel. Alexander Dallas Bache: Building the American Nation through Science and Education in the Nineteenth Century	Book (New York / Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 2011). 352 pp. ISBN 978-3-593-39355-1   Jansen, Axel (2011). Alexander Dallas Bache: Building the American Nation through Science and Education in the Nineteenth Century. Frankfurt/New York: Campus. EAN 9783593393551       Odgers, Merle M. (1947). Alexander Dallas Bache: Scientist and Educator (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press) Gould, Benjamin Apthorp (1868). "An Address in Commemoration of Alexander Dallas Bache: Delivered August 6, 1868, Before the American Association for the Advancement of Science" (Salem, Mass.: Essex Institute Press)    links     Finding Aid to Alexander Dallas Bache Papers, 1821–1869
Alexander von Humboldt    Friedrich Wilhelm Heinrich Alexander von Humboldt ( ; September 14, 1769 – May 6, 1859) was a Prussian geographer, naturalist and explorer, and the younger brother of the Prussian minister, philosopher and linguist Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767–1835). Humboldt's quantitative work on botanical geography laid the foundation for the field of biogeography.Between 1799 and 1804, Humboldt travelled extensively in Latin America, exploring and describing it for the first time in a manner generally considered to be a modern scientific point of view. His description of the journey was written up and published in an enormous set of volumes over 21 years. He was one of the first to propose that the lands bordering the Atlantic Ocean were once joined (South America and Africa in particular). Later, his five-volume work, Kosmos (1845), attempted to unify the various branches of scientific knowledge. Humboldt supported and worked with other scientists, including Joseph-Louis Gay-Lussac, Justus von Liebig, Louis Agassiz, Matthew Fontaine Maury and, most notably, Aimé Bonpland, with whom he conducted much of his scientific exploration. Biography Early life and educationHumboldt was born in Berlin in the Margraviate of Brandenburg. His father, Alexander Georg von Humboldt, belonged to a prominent Pomeranian family; a major in the Prussian Army, he was rewarded for his services in the Seven Years' War with the post of Royal Chamberlain. He married the daughter of the Prussian general adjutant, von Schweder.  In 1766, he married Maria Elizabeth Colomb, the widow of Baron von Hollwede, and they had two sons. The money of Baron von Holwede, left to his former wife, was instrumental in funding Alexander's explorations, contributing more than 70% of Alexander's income. Due to his juvenile penchant for collecting and labelling plants, shells and insects, Alexander received the playful title of "the little apothecary". His father died in 1779, after which his mother saw to his education. Marked for a political career, he studied finance for six months at the University of Frankfurt (Oder); a year later, on April 25, 1789, he matriculated at Göttingen, then known for the lectures of C. G. Heyne and J. F. Blumenbach. His vast and varied interests were by this time fully developed, and during a vacation in 1789, he made a scientific excursion up the Rhine and produced the treatise Mineralogische Beobachtungen über einige Basalte am Rhein (Brunswick, 1790) (Mineralogic Observations on Several Basalts on the River Rhine).Humboldt's passion for travel was confirmed by a friendship formed at Göttingen with Georg Forster, Heyne's son-in-law and the companion of Captain James Cook on Cook's second voyage. Thereafter, his talents were devoted to the purpose of preparing himself as a scientific explorer. With this emphasis, he studied commerce and foreign languages at Hamburg, geology at Technische Universität Bergakademie Freiberg under A. G. Werner, anatomy at Jena under J. C. Loder and astronomy and the use of scientific instruments under F. X. von Zach and J. G. Köhler. His researches into the vegetation of the mines of Freiberg led to the publication, in 1793, of his Florae Fribergensis Specimen. Long experimentation on muscular irritability, then recently discovered by Luigi Galvani, were contained in his Versuche über die gereizte Muskel- und Nervenfaser (Berlin, 1797) (Experiments on the Frayed Muscle and Nerve Fibres), enriched in the French translation with notes by Blumenbach. Travels and work in EuropeIn 1794 Humboldt was admitted to the famous Weimar coterie and contributed (June 7, 1795) to Schiller's new periodical, Die Horen, a philosophical allegory entitled Die Lebenskraft, oder der rhodische Genius. In the summer of 1790 he paid a short visit to England in the company of Forster. In 1792 and 1797 he was in Vienna; in 1795 he made a geological and botanical tour through Switzerland and Italy. He had obtained in the meantime official employment by appointment as assessor of mines at Berlin, February 29, 1792. Although this service to the state was regarded by him as only an apprenticeship to the service of science, he fulfilled its duties with such conspicuous ability that not only did he rise rapidly to the highest post in his department, but he was also entrusted with several important diplomatic missions. The death of his mother, on November 19, 1796, set him free to follow the bent of his genius, and severing his official connections, he waited for an opportunity to fulfil his long-cherished dream of travel. Latin American expeditionOn the postponement of Captain Nicolas Baudin's proposed voyage of circumnavigation, which he had been officially invited to accompany, Humboldt left Paris for Marseille with Aimé Bonpland, the designated botanist of the frustrated expedition, hoping to join Napoleon Bonaparte in Egypt. Means of transport, however, were not forthcoming, and the two travellers eventually found their way to Madrid, where the unexpected patronage of the minister Don Mariano Luis de Urquijo convinced them to make Spanish America the scene of their explorations.Armed with powerful recommendations from the King of Spain, they sailed in the Pizarro from A Coruña, on June 5, 1799, stopped six days on the island of Tenerife to climb the volcano Teide, and landed at Cumaná, Venezuela, on July 16. Humboldt visited the mission at Caripe and explored the Guácharo cavern, where he found the oil-bird, which he was to make known to science as Steatornis caripensis. Returning to Cumaná, Humboldt observed, on the night of November 11–12, a remarkable meteor shower (the Leonids). He proceeded with Bonpland to Caracas where he would climb the Avila mount with Andres Bello. In February 1800, Humboldt and Bonpland left the coast with the purpose of exploring the course of the Orinoco River. This trip, which lasted four months and covered   of wild and largely uninhabited country, had the important result of establishing the existence of the Casiquiare canal (a communication between the water-systems of the rivers Orinoco and Amazon), and of determining the exact position of the bifurcation, as well as documenting the life of several native tribes such as the Maipures and their extinct rivals the Atures (several words of the latter tribe were transferred to Humboldt by one parrot ). Around March 19, 1800, von Humboldt and Bonpland discovered and captured some electric eels. They both received potentially dangerous electric shocks during their investigations.  Two months later they explored the territory of the Maypures and that of the then recently extinct Aturès Indians.On November 24, the two friends set sail for Cuba where they met fellow botanist and plant collector John Fraser, Brendel, Frederick, Historical Sketch of the Science of Botany in North America from 1635 to 1840, The American Naturalist, 13:12 (Dec. 1879), pp. 754-771, The University of Chicago Press. Accessed 31 July 2012.  and after a stay of some months they regained the mainland at Cartagena, Colombia. Ascending the swollen stream of the Magdalena River and crossing the frozen ridges of the Cordillera Real, they reached Quito on January 6, 1802, after a tedious and difficult journey. Their stay there was marked by the ascent of Pichincha and an attempt on Chimborazo. Humboldt and his party reached an altitude of  , a world record at the time. The journey concluded with an expedition to the sources of the Amazon en route for Lima, Peru.  At Callao, Humboldt observed the transit of Mercury on November 9, and studied the fertilizing properties of guano, the subsequent introduction of which into Europe was due mainly to his writings. A tempestuous sea-voyage brought them to Mexico, where they resided for a year, travelling to different cities.Next, Humboldt made a short visit to the United States, staying in the White House as a guest of President Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson, a scientist himself, was delighted to have Humboldt as a guest and the two held numerous intense discussions on scientific matters. After six weeks, Humboldt set sail for Europe from the mouth of the Delaware and landed at Bordeaux on August 3, 1804. Achievements of the Latin American expedition  This memorable expedition may be regarded as having laid the foundation of the sciences of physical geography and meteorology. By his delineation (in 1817) of "isothermal lines", he at once suggested the idea and devised the means of comparing the climatic conditions of various countries. He first investigated the rate of decrease in mean temperature with the increase in elevation above sea level, and afforded, by his inquiries regarding the origin of tropical storms, the earliest clue to the detection of the more complicated law governing atmospheric disturbances in higher latitudes; while his essay on the geography of plants was based on the then novel idea of studying the distribution of organic life as affected by varying physical conditions. His discovery of the decrease in intensity of Earth's magnetic field from the poles to the equator was communicated to the Paris Institute in a memoir read by him on December 7, 1804, and its importance was attested by the speedy emergence of rival claims. His services to geology were based mainly on his attentive study of the volcanoes of the New World. He showed that they fell naturally into linear groups, presumably corresponding with vast subterranean fissures; and by his demonstration of the igneous origin of rocks previously held to be of aqueous formation, he contributed largely to the elimination of erroneous views, such as Neptunism.  Humboldt is considered to be the "second discoverer of Cuba" due to all the scientific and social research he conducted on this Spanish colony. During an initial three-month stay at Havana, his first tasks were to properly survey that city and the nearby towns of Guanabacoa, Regla and Bejucal. He befriended Cuban landowner and thinker Francisco Arango y Parreño; together they visited the   area in south Havana, the valleys of Matanzas Province and the Valley of the Sugar Mills in Trinidad. Those three areas were, at the time, the first frontier of sugar production in the island. During those trips, Humboldt collected statistical information on Cuba's population, production, technology and trade, and with Arango, made suggestions for enhancing them. He predicted that the agricultural and commercial potential of Cuba was huge and could be vastly improved with proper leadership in the future. After traveling to the United States, Humboldt returned to Cuba for a second, shorter stay in April 1804. During this time he socialized with his scientific and landowner friends, conducted mineralogical surveys and finished his vast collection of the island's flora and fauna.Finally, Humboldt conducted a rudimentary census of the indigenous and European inhabitants in New Spain, and on May 5, 1804, he estimated the population to be six million individuals.  The editing and publication of the encyclopedic mass of scientific, political and archaeological material that had been collected by him during his absence from Europe was now Humboldt's most urgent desire. After a short trip to Italy with Gay-Lussac for the purpose of investigating the law of magnetic declination and a sojourn of two and a half years in his native city, he finally, in the spring of 1808, settled in Paris with the purpose of securing the scientific cooperation required for bringing his great work through the press. This colossal task, which he at first hoped would occupy but two years, eventually cost him twenty-one, and even then it remained incomplete. In these early years in Paris, he shared accommodation and a laboratory with his former rival, and now friend, Joseph-Louis Gay-Lussac, both working together on the analysis of gases and the composition of the atmosphere. Humboldtian scienceAlexander von Humboldt thought an approach to science was needed that could account for the harmony of nature among the diversity of the physical world.  For Humboldt, "the unity of nature" meant that it was the interrelation of all physical sciences -- such as the conjoining between biology, meteorology and geology-- that determined where specific plants grew. He found these relationships by unravelling myriad, painstakingly collected data,  data extensive enough that it became an enduring foundation upon which others could base their work. Humboldt viewed nature holistically, and tried to explain natural phenomena without the appeal to religious dogma. He believed in the central importance of observation, and as a consequence had amassed a vast array of the most sophisticated scientific instruments then available. Each had its own velvet lined box and was the most accurate and portable of its time; nothing quantifiable escaped measurement. According to Humboldt, everything should be measured with the finest and most modern instruments and sophisticated techniques available, for it was that collected data was the basis of all scientific understanding. This quantitative methodology would become known as "Humboldtian science."  Humboldt wrote "Nature herself is sublimely eloquent. The stars as they sparkle in firmament fill us with delight and ecstasy, and yet they all move in orbit marked out with mathematical precision."  CriticismHis critics say his writings contain fantastical descriptions of America, while leaving out its inhabitants. They claim Humboldt, coming from the Romantic school of thought, believed '...nature is perfect till man deforms it with care.'    In this line of thinking, they think he largely neglected the human societies amidst this nature. The writing style that describes the 'new world' without people is a trend among explorers both of the past and present. Views of indigenous peoples as 'savage' or 'unimportant' leaves them out of the historical picture.  In reality Humboldt dedicated large parts of his work to describing the conditions of slaves, Indians and society in general. He often showed his disgust for the slavery    and inhumane conditions in which Indians and others were treated and he often criticized the colonial policies.  Some of Humboldt's descriptions or assumptions were not accurate.  Humboldt acclaimed   Humboldt was now one of the most famous men in Europe.  The acclaimed American painter Rembrandt Peale painted him during his European stay, between 1808 and 1810, as one of the most prominent figures in Europe at the time. A chorus of applause greeted him from every side. Academies, both native and foreign, were eager to enrol him among their members. He was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1810. King Frederick William III of Prussia conferred upon him the honour, without exacting the duties, attached to the post of royal chamberlain, together with a pension of 2,500 thalers, afterwards doubled. He refused the appointment of Prussian minister of public instruction in 1810. In 1814 he accompanied the allied sovereigns to London. Three years later he was summoned by the king of Prussia to attend him at the congress of Aachen. Humboldt was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822.    Again in the autumn of 1822 he accompanied the same monarch to the Congress of Verona, proceeded thence with the royal party to Rome and Naples and returned to Paris in the spring of 1823. Humboldt had long regarded the French capital as his true home. There he found not only scientific sympathy, but the social stimulus which his vigorous and healthy mind eagerly craved. He was equally in his element as the lion of the salons and as the savant of the Institut de France and the observatory. During that time he met in 1818, the young and brilliant Peruvian student of the Royal Mining School of Paris, Mariano Eduardo de Rivero y Ustariz. They became good friends. Subsequently von Humboldt acted as a mentor of the career of this promising Peruvian scientist. Thus, when at last he received from his sovereign a summons to join his court at Berlin, he obeyed indeed, but with deep and lasting regret. The provincialism of his native city was odious to him. He never ceased to rail against the bigotry without religion , aestheticism without culture, and philosophy without common sense, which he found dominant on the banks of the Spree. The unremitting benefits and sincere attachment of two well-meaning princes secured his gratitude but could not appease his discontent. At first he sought relief from the "nebulous atmosphere" of his new abode by frequent visits to Paris; but as years advanced, his excursions were reduced to accompanying the monotonous "oscillations" of the court between Potsdam and Berlin. On May 12, 1827, he settled permanently in the Prussian capital, where his first efforts were directed towards the furtherance of the science of terrestrial magnetism. For many years, it had been one of his favourite schemes to secure, by means of simultaneous observations at distant points, a thorough investigation of the nature and law of "magnetic storms" (a term invented by him to designate abnormal disturbances of Earth's magnetism). The meeting at Berlin, on September 18, 1828, of a newly formed scientific association, of which he was elected president, gave him the opportunity of setting on foot an extensive system of research in combination with his diligent personal observations. His appeal to the Russian government, in 1829, led to the establishment of a line of magnetic and meteorological stations across northern Asia. Meanwhile his letter to the Duke of Sussex, then (April 1836) president of the Royal Society, secured for the undertaking, the wide basis of the British dominions.The Encyclopædia Britannica, Eleventh Edition, observes, "Thus that scientific conspiracy of nations which is one of the noblest fruits of modern civilization was by his exertions first successfully organized." However, earlier examples of international scientific cooperation exist, notably the 18th-century observations of the transits of Venus.Then President of Mexico, Benito Juárez, gave him honorary Mexican citizenship. Explorations in RussiaIn 1811, and again in 1818, projects of Asiatic exploration were proposed to Humboldt, first by the Russian government, and afterwards by the Prussian government; but on each occasion, untoward circumstances interposed, and it was not until he had begun his sixtieth year that he resumed his early role of traveller in the interests of science. Between May and November 1829, he, together with his chosen associates, Gustav Rose and C. G. Ehrenberg, traversed the wide expanse of the Russian empire from the Neva to the Yenesei, accomplishing in twenty-five weeks a distance of  . The journey, however, though carried out with all the advantages afforded by the immediate patronage of the Russian government, was too rapid to be profitable. The correction of the prevalent exaggerated estimate of the height of the Central Asian plateau, and the discovery of diamonds in the gold-washings of the Ural, a result which Humboldt's Brazilian experiences enabled him to predict, and by predicting to secure. Humboldt as diplomatBetween 1830 and 1848 von Humboldt was frequently employed in diplomatic missions to the court of Louis Philippe, with whom he always maintained the most cordial personal relations.His brother, Wilhelm von Humboldt, died in Alexander's arms on April 8, 1836. The death saddened the later years of his life; Alexander lamented that he had lost half of himself with the death of his brother.Upon the accession of the crown prince Frederick William IV in June 1840, Humboldt's favour at court increased. Indeed, the new king's craving for Humboldt's company became at times so importunate as to leave him only a few waking hours to work on his writing. The "Cosmos"The first two volumes of the Kosmos were published between the years 1845 and 1847. Humboldt had long intended to write a comprehensive work about geography and the natural sciences.  The writing took shape in lectures he delivered before the University of Berlin in the winter of 1827-28. These lectures would form "the cartoon for the great fresco of the [K]osmos".  The work attempted to unify the sciences then known in a Kantian framework.  With inspiration from German Romanticism, Humboldt sought to create a compendium of the world's environment.He spent the last decade of his long life — as he called them, his "improbable" years — continuing this work. The third and fourth volumes were published in 1850-58; a fragment of a fifth appeared posthumously in 1862.Kosmos was very popular in Britain and America. In 1849 a German newspaper commented that in England two of the three different translations were made by women, "while in Germany most of the men do not understand it."  The first translation by Augustin Pritchard — published anonymously by Mr. Baillière (volume I in 1845 and volume II in 1848) — suffered from being hurriedly made. In a letter Humboldt said of it: "It will damage my reputation. All the charm of my description is destroyed by an English sounding like Sanskrit." The other two translations were made by Mrs. Sabine under the superintendence of her husband Col. Edward Sabine (4 volumes 1846–1858),  and  by Miss E.C. Otté (5 volumes 1849–1858, the only complete translation of the 4 German volumes). These three translations were also published in America. The numbering of the volumes differs between the German and the English editions. Volume 3 of the German edition corresponds to the volumes 3 and 4 of the English translation, as the German volume appeared in 2 parts in 1850 and 1851. Volume 5 of the German edition was not translated until 1981, again by a woman.    Miss Otté's translation benefited from a detailed table of contents, and an index for every volume; of the German edition only volumes 4 and 5 had a (extremely short) tables of contents, and the index to the whole work only appeared with volume 5 in 1862.Not so well known in Germany is the atlas belonging to the German edition of the Cosmos "Berghaus’ Physikalischer Atlas", better known as the pirated version by Traugott Bromme under the title "Atlas zu Alexander von Humboldt's Kosmos" (Stuttgart 1861). In Britain Heinrich Berghaus planned to publish together with Alexander Keith Johnston a "Physical Atlas". But later Johnston published it alone under the title "The Physical Atlas of Natural Phenomena". In Britain its connection to the Cosmos seems not have been recognized.  Illness and death On February 24, 1857, Humboldt suffered a minor stroke, which passed without perceptible symptoms. It was not until the winter of 1858-1859 that his strength began to decline, and that spring, on May 6, he died quietly in Berlin at the age of 89. The honours which had been showered on him during life continued after his death. His remains, prior to being interred in the family resting-place at Tegel, were conveyed in state through the streets of Berlin, and received by the prince-regent at the door of the cathedral. The first centenary of his birth was celebrated on September 14, 1869, with great enthusiasm in both the New and Old Worlds. Numerous monuments were constructed in his honour, and newly explored regions named after Humboldt, bear witness to his wide fame and popularity. Personal lifeMuch of Humboldt's private life remains a mystery because he destroyed his private letters.In 1908 the sexual researcher Paul Näcke, who worked with outspoken gay activist Magnus Hirschfeld, gathered reminiscences of him from people who recalled his participation in the homosexual subculture of Berlin.  A travelling companion, the pious Francisco José de Caldas, accused him of frequenting houses where 'impure love reigned', of making friends with 'obscene dissolute youths', and giving vent to 'shameful passions of his heart'.   But author Robert  F. Aldrich concludes hesitantly:  "As for so many men of his age, a definite answer is impossible."  Throughout his life Humboldt formed strong emotional attachments to men.   In a letter to Reinhard von Haeften, a soldier, he wrote: "I know that I live only through you, my good precious Reinhard, and that I can only be happy in your presence."  He never married, yet there were at least two notable occasions where he seemed to have been drawn to the opposite sex. The first was an adolescent infatuation with Henriette Herz, the beautiful wife of Marcus Herz, his mentor, and the second was a short lived but intimate relationship with a woman named Pauline Wiesel in 1808 Paris.  He was strongly attached to his brother's family. Four years before his death, he executed a deed of gift transferring the absolute possession of his entire property to an old family  servant named Seifert. Humboldt made many friends and had a reputation for widespread benevolence.  He showed zeal for the improvement of the condition of the miners in Galicia and Franconia, detestation of slavery,  and patronage of rising men of science.  Honours and namesakes Species named after Humboldt   See also the list of things named for Alexander von Humboldt.  As a consequence of his explorations, von Humboldt described many geographical features and species of life that were hitherto unknown to Europeans. Species named after him include:  Spheniscus humboldti — Humboldt penguin Dosidicus gigas — Humboldt squid Lilium humboldtii — Humboldt's lily Phragmipedium humboldtii — an orchid Quercus humboldtii — South American (Andean) oak Conepatus humboldtii — Humboldt's Hog-nosed skunk Annona humboldtii — Neotropical fruit tree or shrub Utricularia humboldtii — a bladderwort Geranium humboldtii — a cranesbill Salix humboldtiana — a South-American willow.     Inia geoffrensis humboldtiana — Amazon River Dolphin subspecies living at Orinoco River basin   Geographical features named after HumboldtFeatures named after him include the following:  Humboldt Bay — Bay in Northern California Humboldt Current — off the west coast of South America Humboldt Glacier — in North West Greenland Humboldt River—River in Nevada Humboldt Peak (Colorado)—4,287 meter mountain in Custer County, Colorado, United States Pico Humboldt—4,940 meter mountain in Mérida, Venezuela Humboldt Sink—Dry lake bed in Nevada East and West Humboldt Range Sima Humboldt - sinkhole in Venezuela Venezuela's first-designated national monument (the "Monumento Nacional Alejandro de Humboldt") at Caripe   Places named after HumboldtThe following places are named for Humboldt:  Hacienda Humboldt, Chihuahua, Mexico Humboldt, South Dakota, United States Humboldt, Nebraska, United States Humboldt, Illinois, United States Humboldt, Iowa, United States Humboldt, Tennessee, United States Humboldt, Kansas, United States Humboldt, Minnesota, United States Humboldt, Arizona, United States Humboldt County, California, United States Humboldt County, Nevada, United States Humboldt County, Iowa, United States Humboldt, Saskatchewan, Canada Humboldt Park: an official Community Area and park in Chicago, Illinois, United States Humboldt Park in Milwaukee, Wisconsin Alejandro de Humboldt National Park, Cuba Alexander von Humboldt National Forest in Peru Humboldt Hotel in Cerro El Ávila, Venezuela Humboldt Street in Brooklyn, New York Humboldt Parkway in Buffalo, New York Humboldt Avenue in Milwaukee, Wisconsin Humboldt Avenue in Caracas, Venezuela Alexander von Humboldt Street (Ulica Alexandra von Humboldta) in Zagreb, Croatia Humboldt-Toiyobe National Forest, California, United States Alexander von Humboldt street, Bucharest, Romania  The Mare Humboldtianum lunar mare is named after him, as is the asteroid 54 Alexandra. Universities, Colleges, and Schools Universities  Humboldt University of Berlin is named after Alexander and his brother Wilhelm who founded it.  Humboldt Tropical Medicine Institute at Cayetano Heredia University, Lima, Peru Humboldt State University in Arcata, California Universidad Alejandro de Humboldt, in Caracas, Venezuela.   Colleges  Colegio Alemán Humboldt, Guayaquil, Ecuador. Colegio Alemán Alexander von Humboldt, Mexico City Mexico.   Primary and Secondary Schools  Alexander-von-Humboldt-Gymnasium, Konstanz, Germany Humboldt Elementary School, Humboldt, Arizona Humboldt Elementary School in Portland, Oregon Humboldt Junior High School, Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States Humboldt Senior High School, Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States German International School, Montreal, Canada Liceo Alejandro Humboldt, Calabozo, Venezuela Liceo Alejandro Humboldt, Caracas, Venezuela Humboldt Schule, San Jose, Costa Rica Colegio de Alexander von Humboldt, Tacna, Perú Colegio de Alexander von Humboldt, Lima, Perú   Lecture SeriesAlexander Von Humboldt also lends his name to a prominent lecture series in Human geography in the Netherlands (hosted by the Radboud University Nijmegen). It is the Dutch equivalent of the widely known annual Hettner lectures at the University of Heidelberg. The Alexander von Humboldt FoundationAfter his death, his friends and colleagues created the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (Stiftung in German) to continue von Humboldt's generous support of young scientists. Although the original endowment was lost in the German hyperinflation of the 1920s, and again as a result of World War II, the Foundation has been re-endowed by the German government to award young scientists and distinguished senior scientists from abroad. It plays an important role in attracting foreign researchers to work in Germany and enabling German researchers to work abroad for a period DedicationsEdgar Allan Poe dedicated his last major work, Eureka: A Prose Poem, to von Humboldt. Humboldt's attempt to unify the sciences in his Kosmos was a big inspiration for Poe's project.Charles Darwin made frequent reference to Humboldt's work in his Voyage of the Beagle, where Darwin described his own scientific exploration of the Americas. In one note, he placed Humboldt first on the "list of American travellers". Darwin, C. R. 1839. Narrative of the surveying voyages of His Majesty's Ships Adventure and Beagle between the years 1826 and 1836, describing their examination of the southern shores of South America, and the Beagle's circumnavigation of the globe. Journal and remarks. 1832-1836. London: Henry Colburn. p. 110  When this Journal was published, Darwin sent a copy to Humboldt, who responded "You told me in your kind letter that, when you were young, the manner in which I studied and depicted nature in the torrid zones contributed toward exciting in you the ardour and desire to travel in distant lands. Considering the importance of your work, Sir, this may be the greatest success that my humble work could bring."  In his autobiography, Darwin recalled reading "with care and profound interest Humboldt's Personal Narrative" and finding it one of the two most influential books on his work, which had "stirred up in me a burning zeal to add even the most humble contribution to the noble structure of Natural Science." Barlow, Nora ed. 1958. The autobiography of Charles Darwin 1809-1882. With the original omissions restored. Edited and with appendix and notes by his grand-daughter Nora Barlow. London: Collins. pp. 67–68  ShipAlexander von Humboldt is also a German ship named after the scientist originally built in 1906 by the German shipyard AG Weser at Bremen as Reserve Sonderburg.  She was operated throughout the North and Baltic Seas until being retired in 1986.  Subsequently she was converted into a three masted barque by the German shipyard Motorwerke Bremerhaven and was re-launched in 1988 as Alexander von Humboldt. Recognitions by contemporariesWilhelm von Humboldt: "Alexander is destined to combine ideas and follow chains of thoughts which would otherwise have remained unknown for ages. His depth, his sharp mind and his incredible speed are a rare combination."  Charles Darwin: expressed his debt to Humboldt, and admiration for his work,  and wrote to Joseph Dalton Hooker that Humboldt was the "greatest scientific traveller who ever lived".   Johann Wolfgang von Goethe: "Humboldt showers us with true treasures."  Friedrich von Schiller: "Alexander impresses many, particularly when compared to his brother - because he shows off more!"  Simón Bolívar: "Alexander von Humboldt has done more for America than all its conquerors, he is the true discoverer of America."  José de la Luz y Caballero: "Columbus gave Europe a New World; Humboldt made it known in its physical, material, intellectual, and moral aspects."  Napoléon Bonaparte: "You have been studying Botanics? Just like my wife!"  Claude Louis Berthollet: "This man is as knowledgeable as a whole academy."  Thomas Jefferson: "I consider him the most important scientist whom I have met."  Emil Du Bois-Reymond: "Every scientist is a descendant of Humboldt. We are all his family."  Robert G. Ingersoll: "He was to science what Shakespeare was to the drama."  Hermann von Helmholtz: "During the first half of the present century we had an Alexander von Humboldt, who was able to scan the scientific knowledge of his time in its details, and to bring it within one vast generalization. At the present juncture, it is obviously very doubtful whether this task could be accomplished in a similar way, even by a mind with gifts so peculiarly suited for the purpose as Humboldt's was, and if all his time and work were devoted to the purpose."   Publications Scientific works Le voyage aux régions equinoxiales du Nouveau Continent, fait en 1799-1804, par Alexandre de Humboldt et Aimé Bonpland (Paris, 1807, etc.), consisted of thirty folio and quarto volumes, and comprised a considerable number of subordinate but important works. Among these may be enumerated  Vue des Cordillères et monuments des peuples indigènes de l'Amérique (2 vols. folio, 1810); Examen critique de l'histoire de la géographie du Nouveau Continent (1814–1834); Atlas géographique et physique du royaume de la Nouvelle Espagne (1811); Essai politique sur le royaume de la Nouvelle Espagne (1811); Essai sur la géographie des plantes :accompagné d'un tableau physique des régions équinoxiales, fondé sur des mesures exécutées, depuis le dixième degré de latitude boréale jusqu'au dixième degré de latitude australe, pendant les années 1799, 1800, 1801, 1802 et 1803 /par Al. de Humdboldt et A. Bonpland ; rédigée par Al. de Humboldt.  (1805, now very rare); Relation historique du Voyage aux Régions équinoxiales du Nouveau Continent, etc. (1814–1825), an unfinished narrative of his travels, including the Essai politique sur l'île de Cuba Monographie des melastomacées (1833) Monographia Melastomacearum : continens plantas huius ordinis, hucusque collectas, praesertim per regnum Mexici, in provinciis Caracarum et Novae Andalusiae, in Peruvianorum, Quitensium, Novae Granatae Andibus, ad Orinoci, fluvii Nigri, fluminis Amazonum rupas nascentes(2 vols.) Cosmos : a sketch of a physical description of the universe / by Alexander von Humboldt ; translated from the German by E.C. Otté (5 vols.) Cosmos : essai d'une description physique du monde  (4 vols.) Gesammelte werke von Alexander von Humboldt(12 vols.) Ansichten der Natur : mit wissenschaftlichen Erläuterungen  Aphorismen aus der chemischen physiologie der pflanzen. Aus dem lateinischen übersetzt von Gotthelf Fischer. Nebst einigen zusätzen von herrn dr. und prof. Hedwig und einer vorrede von herrn dr. und prof. Christ. Friedr. Ludwig. Aspects of nature, in different lands and different climates with scientific elucidations Atlas zu Alex. v. Humboldt's Kosmos in zweiundvierzig Tafeln mit erläuterndem texte /herausgegeben von Traugott Bromme Briefe von Alexander von Humboldt an Varnhagen von Ense, aus den jahren 1827 bis 1858 : nebst Auszügen aus Varnhagen's Tagebüchern und Briefen von Varnhagen und andern an Humboldt Ideen zu einer Geographie der Pflanzen :nebst einem Naturgemälde der Tropenländer : auf Beobachtungen und Messungen gegründet, welche vom 10ten Grade nördlicher bis zum 10ten Grade südlicher Breite, in den Jahren 1799, 1800, 1801, 1802 und 1803 angestellt worden sind /von Al. von Humboldt und A. Bonpland ; bearbeitet und herausgegeben von dem erstern An illustration of the genus Cinchona :comprising descriptions of all the officinal Peruvian barks, including several new species, Baron de Humboldt's Account of the Cinchona forests of South America, and Laubert's Memoir on the different species of quinquina : to which are added several dissertations of Don Hippolito Ruiz on various medicinal plants of South America  Kosmos. Entwurf einer physischen Weltbeschreibung von Alexander von Humboldt (5 vols.) Narrative of the circumnavigation of the globe by the Austrian frigate Novara (3 vols.) Pflanzengeographie, nach Alexander von Humboldt's werke ueber die geographische Vertheilhung der Gewächse : mit Anmerkungen, grösseren Beilagen aus andern pflanzengeographischen Schriften und einem Excurse über die bei pflanzengeographischen Floren-Vergleichungen nöthigen Rücksichten Plantes équinoxiales recueillies au Mexique :dans l'île de Cuba, dans les provinces de Caracas, de Cumana et de Barcelone, aux Andes de la Nouvelle Grenade, de Quito et du Pérou, et sur les bords du rio-Negro de Orénoque et de la rivière des Amazones(2 vols.) Recueil d'observations de zoologie et d'anatomie compar : faites dans l'ocn atlantique, dans l'intieur du nouveau continent et dans la mer du sud pendant les anns 1799, 1800, 1801, 1802 et 1803 / par Al. de Humboldt et A. Bonpland(2 vols.) Reise in die aequinoctial-gegenden des neuen Continents in den Jahren 1799, 1800, 1801, 1803 und 1804(vol.3) Relation historique du voyage aux régions équinoxiales du nouveau continent, fait en 1799, 1800, 1801, 1802, 1803, et 1804(vol.3) Tableaux de la nature; ou, Considérations sur les déserts, sur le physionomie des végétaux, sur les cataractes de l'Orénoque, sur la structure et l'action des volcans dans les différentes régions de la terre Views of nature, or, Contemplations on the sublime phenomena of creation : with scientific illustrations(1850) Views of nature: or, Contemplations on the sublime phenomena of creation; with scientific illustrations(1884)   Other works   Letters of Alexander von Humboldt to Varnhagen von Ense. From 1827 to 1858. With extracts from Varnhagen's diaries, and letters of Varnhagen and others to Humboldt. Tr. from the 2d German ed. by Friedrich Kapp Letters of Alexander von Humboldt written between the years 1827 and 1858 to Varnhagen von Ense together with extracts from Varnhagen's diaries, and letters of Varnhagen and others to Humboldt / authorized translation from the German ; with explanatory notes and a full index of names Personal narrative of travels to the equinoctial regions of America, during the years 1799-1804 / by Alexander von Humboldt and Aimé Bonpland ; translated from the French of Alexander von Humboldt and edited by Thomasina Ross (Vols 2 & 3) Political essay on the kingdom of New Spain containing researches relative to the geography of Mexico ; translated from the original French by John Black The travels and researches of Alexander von Humboldt by W. Macgillivray ; with a narrative of Humboldt's most recent researches The travels and researches of Alexander von Humboldt : being a condensed narrative of his journeys in the equinoctial regions of America, and in Asiatic Russia : together with analysis of his more important investigations / by W. Macgillivray Viage âa las regiones equinocciales del nuevo continente : hecho en 1799 hasta 1804, por Al. de Humboldt y A. Bonpland / redactado por Alejandro de Humboldt ; continuaciâon indispensable al ensayo polâitico sobre el reino de la Nueva Espaäna por el mismo autor (5 vols.)   The genera et species plantarum (7 vols. folio, 1815–1825), containing descriptions of above 4500 species of plants collected by Humboldt and Bonpland, was mainly compiled by Carl Sigismund Kunth; J. Oltmanns assisted in preparing the Recueil d'observations astronomiques (1808); Cuvier, Latreille, Valenciennes and Gay-Lussac cooperated in the Recueil d'observations de zoologie et d'anatomie comparée (1805–1833). Humboldt's Ansichten der Natur (Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1808) went through three editions in his lifetime, and was translated into nearly every European language.The results of his Asiatic journey were published in Fragments de géologie et de climatologie asiatiques (2 vols. 8vo, 1831), and in Asie centrale (3 vols. 8vo, 1843) an enlargement of the earlier work. The memoirs and papers read by him before scientific societies, or contributed by him to scientific periodicals, are too numerous for specification.  Biographies and studies of his work  Nicolaas A. Rupke.  Alexander von Humboldt: A Metabiography (University of Chicago Press, 2008) 316 pp. online review Laura Dassow Walls. The Passage to Cosmos: Alexander von Humboldt and the Shaping of America (2009)  A 1992 essay entitled "Journey to the Top of the World" details Humboldt's South American exploration and America's interest in him. The essay is chapter one of David McCullough's book, Brave Companions: Portraits in History (Prentice Hall Press, 1992).Gerard Helferich's 2004 biography Humboldt's Cosmos: Alexander von Humboldt and the Latin American Journey that Changed the World (Gotham Books, 2004) provides a descriptive account of Humboldt's journey through Latin America, it utilizes Humboldt's journals. Daniel Kehlmann's 2005 novel Die Vermessung der Welt, translated into English by Carol Brown Janeway as Measuring the World in 2006, explores Humboldt's life through a lens of historical fiction, contrasting his character and contributions to science to those of Carl Friedrich Gauss.Humboldt's effect on American scientists and environmentalists (Clarence King, Jeremiah N. Reynolds, George Wallace Melville, and John Muir) is examined in The Humboldt Current: Nineteenth Century Exploration and the Roots of American Environmentalism, by Aaron Sachs (Viking, 2006). See also   Humboldtian science List of explorers Ecology History of biology Aimé Bonpland   Notes  References          Hey'l, Bettina, Das Ganze der Natur und die Differenzierung des Wissens. Alexander von Humboldt als Schriftsteller (Berlin, de Gruyter, 2007) (Quellen und Forschungen zur Literatur- und Kulturgeschichte 47 (281)). Rupke, Nicolaas A., Alexander von Humboldt. A Metabiography.  Corrected edition. (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 2008).      External links    Portal  The Alexander von Humboldt Foundation The Alexander von Humboldt Digital Library A virtual research environment on the works of Alexander von Humboldt. A project by the University of Applied Sciences Offenburg and University of Kansas avhumboldt.de - Humboldt Informationen online avhumboldt.de contains a large collection of data, texts and visuals concerning Alexander von Humboldt in German, English, Spanish and French. A project by the Chair of Romance Literatures, University of Potsdam (Germany). Website of the Von Humboldt Lecture series in Nijmegen, the Netherlands Sources  Humboldt Digital Library HiN-International Review for Humboldtian Studies Biannual open access journal on transdisciplinary studies concerning Alexander von Humboldt (ISSN: 1617-5239). With articles in English, German and Spanish, both as HTML and PDF. A project by the Chair of Romance Literatures, University of Potsdam, and the Berlin-Brandenburgian Academy of Science. Humboldt Digital - Bibliography of Humboldt digital facsimile, available online. List with over 150 direct references to full-text facsimiles of works by Alexander von Humboldt. Works by or about Alexander von Humboldt at Internet Archive (scanned books original editions color illustrated)     (plain text and HTML) Misc  "Alexander von Humboldt", from In Our Time, a 45 minutes BBC Radio 4 program. Alexander von Humboldt featured on the 5 East German Mark banknote from 1964 A.J.P. Raat, Alexander von Humboldt and Coenraad Jacob Temminck, Zoologische Bijdragen, Vol. 21, 1976, p. 19-38   PSM}}
